{"ref": "corpus_segments:1677", "course": "C05", "seq": 295, "wylie": "zer na ma khyab ste, dang por yi dvags kyis chu ma mthong na phyogs der longs spyod pa'i phyir, 'gro ba yang mi 'thad pas dang por chu mthong yang , phyis las kyi dbang gis chu ma mthong bar 'og gzhi gram sreg tsam zhig mthong zhing , de'i rjes su rtog pas chu bskams par zhen pa dang , de bzhin du dang por ljon shing gi 'bras bu mthong yang phyis las kyi dbang gis 'bras bu ma mthong bar yal ga tsam zhig mthong zhing , de'i rjes su rtog pas 'bras bu med par zhen pa'i phyir", "english": "Just because we said that about the other case doesn't mean that it's true in every case. If the craving spirit hadn't seen any water in that area in the first place, it wouldn't have made any sense for him to go over in that direction to try to enjoy some of the water. Therefore what happened was that, at first, he saw some water. Later on, he was forced by his karma to stop seeing water and saw only bare, parched earth. Then he had an impression where he thought the water had dried up. The case with the fruit tree is the same. Although at first the craving spirit sees a tree loaded with fruit, later on his karma forces him to stop seeing fruit, and all he sees is bare branches. Then he has an impression where he thinks that the tree has no fruit any more."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5991", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:1677"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:34925", "course": "P7", "seq": 36, "wylie": "zer na ma khyab ste dang por yi dwags kyis chu ma mthong na phyogs der longs spyod, pa'i phyir 'gro ba yang mi 'thad pas dang por chu mthong yang phyis las kyi dbang, gis chu ma mthong bar 'og gzhi gram sreg tsam zhig mthong zhing de'i rjes su rtog, pas chu bskams par zhen pa dang de bzhin du dang por ljon shing gi 'bras bu mthong yang phyis las kyi dbang gis 'bras bu ma mthong bar yal ga tsam zhig mthong zhing de'i rjes su rtog pas 'bras bu med par zhen pa'i phyir", "english": "Just because we said that about the other case doesn't mean that it's true in every case. If the craving spirit hadn't seen any water in that area in the first place, it wouldn't have made any sense for him to go over in that direction to try to enjoy some of the water. Therefore what happened was that, at first, he saw some water. Later on, he was forced by his karma to stop seeing water and saw only bare, parched earth. Then he had an impression where he thought the water had dried up. The case with the fruit tree is the same. Although at first the craving spirit sees a tree loaded with fruit, later on his karma forces him to stop seeing fruit, and all he sees is bare branches. Then he has an impression where he thinks that the tree has no fruit any more."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:64", "course": "C01", "seq": 64, "wylie": "'o na de 'du lugs ji ltar yin snyam na, gsung rab dgongs 'grel dang bcas pa'i don mtha' dag gdul bya rnams sangs rgyas thob pa'i thabs 'ba' zhig tu gsungs shing , de thob par byed pa la rgyu thabs shes gnyis la bslab dgos pas, de gnyis kyi gtso bo ni, byang chub kyi sems dang yang dag pa'i lta ba gnyis yin, de gnyis rgyud la skye ba la thog mar rang nyid 'khor ba'i phun tshogs la yang zhen pa gting nas log ste", "english": "How is each packed into the next? Every single thought expressed in the holy words of the Buddhas, and in the commentaries which explain them, was uttered for the sole purpose of helping disciples to attain the state of Buddhahood. To achieve this state, one must verse himself in the two causes that bring it about: we call them \"method\" and \"wisdom.\" The main elements of these two causes are also two: the desire to attain Buddhahood for the sake of all living beings, and correct view. To develop these attitudes in the stream of one's mind, a person must first gain an absolute disgust for all the apparent good things of the life he himself is spending in the circle of births."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:156", "course": "C01", "seq": 156, "wylie": "de ldog pa la dal 'byor don che rnyed dka' dang 'chi ba mi rtag pa gnyis bsam na tshe 'di'i snang shas log ste tshe 'di blos thongs pa zhig 'ong , rang res da lta chos ma byas na lta ci, byas kyang chos su mi 'gro ba 'di tshe 'di'i snang shas ma ldog pas lan pa yin, blo sbyong zhen pa bzhi bral las kyang", "english": "How to stop it? You must contemplate the two Steps known as (1) the \"great importance of this life of leisure and fortune, and the difficulty of finding it,\" as well as (2) our \"impermanence, the fact that we must die.\" These thoughts then will turn back your desire for this life--in your mind, you will give up on it. The fact that you and I right now never do any spiritual practice--no, worse, the fact that we try and what we do is anything but spiritual practice--is all because of our desire for this life. Free of Four Loves, the mental- training text, puts it this way:"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:162", "course": "C01", "seq": 162, "wylie": "de la rgyas par na 'jig rten chos brgyad dang , de dag tshur bsdu na tshe 'dir zhen pa'i lto gos gtam gsum du 'du bas 'di gsum blos btang dgos", "english": "In a broad sense we can start with what are known as the \"eight worldly thoughts.\" These then can be shortened into three concerns of this life: food, clothes, and a big name. These three are what you have to give up on."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:177", "course": "C01", "seq": 177, "wylie": "shi phugs grog po skam po la gtad pa ni, rang la yo byad gtan nas med na, rang na ba dang , rgas pa dang , 'chi dus tshun chad la g-yog byed mkhan dang , ro skyel byed tshun chad dgos snyam pa yang tshe 'di'i phun tshogs la zhen pa yin, rang nyid lo rgas rgas bar du tshe ring por sdod pa'i nges pa gtan nas med pas, de bas chos bsgrubs nas rang la blta mkhan med par grog po skam po'i nang du khyi shi ba ltar ro la 'bu brgyab kyang rung snyam du gang la'ang ma chags par dben pa'i ri khrod du chos sgrub pa yin", "english": "\"Aiming your death ultimately to some dusty ravine\" comes like this: Suppose you think to yourself, \"But there are certain things that I need from now up to the time I die. If I don't have any money at all, how am I going to get someone to help me when I'm sick? Who will attend me in my old age? Who will be there at my deathbed? And who will take care of things after I die--who will take the body away, and all the rest?\" All these kinds of thoughts come under the category of attachment to the good things of this life. There's no way at all you can be sure that you'll even live long enough to reach any old age. Better to go to some lonely mountain retreat, and give up attachment to anything at all, and think to yourself \"Now I'm going to practice, and I don't care if I die like some stray dog in a dusty ravine, with no one to look after me, and maggots crawling all over the corpse.\""}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:188", "course": "C01", "seq": 188, "wylie": "tshe blos gtong zhes pa'i blos gtong rgyu'i gtso bo 'di snang chos brgyad kyi zhen pa de blos thong ba dgos, de thongs na yo byad thams cad gtor nas sprang po byed pa zhig nges par mi dgos te, dam pa tshos tshe blos thongs pa'i tshad la rgyal mchog bskal bzang rgya mtsho dang , paN chen blo bzang ye shes sogs 'jog par mdzad pa yin", "english": "Now when we say to \"give up on this life,\" the main thing that you have to give up is those eight worldly thoughts or attachments, towards the pleasures of this life. Giving up these thoughts doesn't necessarily mean that you have to throw away all your material possessions and become a beggar. Holy teachers of the past have pointed out for us examples of people who succeeded in giving up on life, and these have included personages of fantastic material wealth such as Gyalchok Kelsang Gyatso and the Panchen Lobsang Yeshe.97"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:196", "course": "C01", "seq": 196, "wylie": "zhes gsungs pa ltar 'jig rten chos brgyad blos btang ste sgrub pa nyams len gsha' ma zhig yong ba la dal 'byor don che rnyed dka' dang , 'chi ba mi rtag pa gnyis kyi rtogs pa skye ba zhig dgos, de skyes na ri thams cad gser dang , chu thams cad 'o ma, mi thams cad rang gi bran du gyur kyang mi mkho ba skyug nad can la btso zan byin pa ltar zhen pa gting nas log pa zhig yong , rtogs pa de yang thos byung gzhan stobs kyis skyes pas mi chog par, bsam byung rang stobs kyis skyes na gzhan du mi 'gyur bar brtan po 'ong ba yin", "english": "The point here is that, to rid yourself of the eight worldly thoughts and undertake a spiritual practice which is truly pure, you must gain two different realizations: first, of how valuable and hard to find one's life of leisure and fortune is; secondly, of one's own impermanence and the fact that he must die. Once you gain these realizations, it doesn't matter--the hills can turn to gold, the rivers into milk, and every man your slave--but to you it's all repulsive, useless, like a feast set before a sick man vomiting. And it's not enough for these realizations to come to you just from the outside--from sitting and listening to someone describe them. They must come from the inside, from thinking about them yourself. Then they will be firm in your mind, and never change again."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:1597", "course": "C05", "seq": 215, "wylie": "gnyis pa ni, gal te kun gzhi rnam shes khas mi len kyang dge mi dge'i bag chags 'jog pa dang , bag chags de smin pa las 'bras bu 'byung bar 'dod dgos te, 'jug 'grel las, thog ma med pa'i 'khor bar dngos po'i bag chags bzhag pa yongs su smin pa, dngos po la mngon par zhen pa, zhes dang , de 'dra ba gzhan yang mang du 'byung ba'i phyir ro, , de yang bag chags 'jog pa'i gzhi med par mi rung bas gzhi de gang yin zhe na", "english": "Here is the second part [of a different] discussion [about where the Madhyamika school believes the mental seeds from karma are planted, since they do not accept the concept of foundation consciousness]. One may begin with the following question: Suppose you deny then the existence of a foundation consciousness. Nonetheless you must accept that mental seeds from virtue or non-virtue do get planted, and that consequences do arise from the ripening of these mental seeds. After all, the autocommentary to Entering the Middle Way does state that \"For time without beginning, in the suffering cycle of life, the mental seeds for things have been planted, and have then ripened, and have then been interpreted by people as the things themselves.\" There are as well many other quotations which mention the same thing. And it would be incorrect to say that there existed no basis or place where these mental seeds were planted. What then, according to your view, provides this place for the seeds to be planted?"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:2018", "course": "C06", "seq": 125, "wylie": "rgyu mtshan ni rab 'byor sngon gyi dus gang gi tshe ka ling ka'i rgyal pos nga kho rang gi bud med dang 'brel lam snyam pa'i dogs ngan byung ste ral gris nga'i yan lag dang nying lag sor mo rnams bcad par gyur pa de'i tshe, ngas bzod pa'i 'khor gsum bden med du shes nas bzod pa bsgoms pas, tha snyad pa'i nga la dmigs nas nga'o snyam du bdag tu bden par zhen pa'i 'du shes nas gang zag tu bden par zhen pa'i 'du shes kyang ma byung zhing , de'i tshe nga la de lta bu'i bden zhen gyi 'du shes ci yang med la, tha snyad du 'du shes gzhan med par gyur pa yang ma yin te, bzod do snyam pa'i sdug bsngal dang len dang gnod pa la ji mi snyam pa dang , bden med du rtogs pa'i chos la nges sems kyi 'du shes rnams yod pa'i phyir ro snyam du dgongs so", "english": "For what reason is it so? Because long ago there was a time, o Subhuti, when the king of Kalingka got the evil suspicion that I had engaged in relations with his woman. And so he was cutting off the larger limbs, and smaller appendages of my body. (The latter refers to the fingers and toes.) At that moment I practiced patience, keeping my mind on an understanding of the lack of true existence to each of the three elements to the act of patience. As I focussed on the \"me\" which exists nominally, there came into my mind no conception where I held any belief in some truly existing \"me\": and so I had no conception of anything from a truly existing \"self\" up to a truly existing \"person.\" At that moment I had no conception at all of any such conception that something was existing truly. At the same time though it was neither as if I had no other, nominal conceptions at all. What Subhuti is saying here is the following. I did have the thought that I would have to keep my patience: I did have the thought to take the pain on willingly, and not to be upset about the harm being done to me. And I did have the kind of conception where I reconfirmed my knowledge of how I had perceived that no existing object has any true existence."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:3285", "course": "C10", "seq": 311, "wylie": "dang po ni, spang bar 'os pa de lta bas na nyon mongs gzhom pa la dus rtag tu bsam sbyor gang yang phyir mi ldog par bya'o, , nyon mongs kyi gnyen po 'di la bdag gis zhen pa ste ched du bsten par bya zhing nyon mongs la khon du gzung nas g-yul bskrad la gzhom par bya'o", "english": "Here is the first of the two. The mental afflictions are, therefore, things which deserve to be eliminated. As such, I should never turn back, either in my thoughts or my actions, from the task of destroying them, even for a single moment. I should get attached to these antidotes for the mental afflictions; that is, I should make use of the antidotes. And I should learn to hate the mental afflictions, and make war on them, and smash them."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:3286", "course": "C10", "seq": 312, "wylie": "spang gnyen la chags sdang dang spang bya la khon du 'dzin pa nyid nyon mongs yin pas spang byar 'gyur ro zhe na, gnyen po la zhen pa dang spang bya la khon du 'dzin pa rnam pa de 'dra'i nyon mongs pa ltar snang ba ni nyon mongs 'joms par byed pa'i gnyen po'i phyogs yin pas spang byar ma gtogs so, , 'grel par phyis de yang gzhom byar bshad pa ni spang bya zad pa na spang gnyen g-yul sprod mi dgos pa'i don to", "english": "Someone may ask the following question: \"You seem to be describing some kind of bias in the attitude we should have towards the antidotes that eliminate our mental afflictions, and you have spoken about hating the thing that the antidote is supposed to eliminate. Aren't these types of thoughts themselves just another kind of mental affliction--that is, the very thing which we are trying to eliminate?\" These kinds of attitudes--of being attached to the antidotes for mental affliction, and of hating the mental afflictions we are trying to eliminate--are themselves only apparent mental afflictions. Because they are included into the antidote side--that is, because they are part of what acts to destroy the mental afflictions--they are not counted among the objects which we seek to eliminate from our minds. There are commentaries which do state that these are themselves something to be destroyed later, but what they mean by saying this is that, once one has finished off all the objects to be eliminated, one need no longer make war."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:3376", "course": "C10", "seq": 402, "wylie": "lnga pa ni, khro ba dang sdug bsngal sogs mi bzod pa dang , dge ba la mi spro ba'i le lo'i dbang gis dge ba bsgrub pa sogs la 'jigs pa dang , de bzhin du kun tu ma bsdams pas phod che ba'i spyi gtol dang 'brel med kyi mu cor smra ba dang , rang gi phyogs gnyen sogs la zhen pa'i sems byung na des ni sbyor bas gnyen po bzungs thub pa shing bzhin du gnas par bya'o", "english": "Here is the fifth section. Suppose I reach a point where I feel I can no longer endure another's anger, or some suffering, or anything of the like. Or suppose I fall under the power of laziness, meaning a lack of joy for performing virtuous deeds, and so develop a fear for accomplishing good deeds or such. Just so I might want to act in some insistent, uncontrolled way, lacking any self- restraint at all, or else feel the urge to engage in some irrelevant chatter. Or else I may get the thought to feel some bias for my own kind, my own relatives or the like. At such times too I should stop myself, and stay as still as a bump on a log, and maintain the antidotes for all these actions."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:3607", "course": "C11", "seq": 188, "wylie": "rang gi sems bsrung na yid ni lus can ma yin pas tshig rtsub dang mtshon la sogs pa sus kyang gang du'ang gzhom mi nus pas so, , des na rtog pas lus la mngon par zhen pas na lus ni sdug bsngal dag gis gnod pas khro bar byed do zhe na, gzhan gyis rang la brnyas pa dang tshig rtsub smra ba dang , mi snyan pa yi tshig de yis rang gi lus la cung zad kyang gnod par mi 'gyur na sems khyod ci'i phyir rab tu khro khro bar mi rigs so", "english": "Assuming I am able to control my own thoughts, the mind could never be overcome by anyone at any point at all using harsh words or weapons or the like, because it is not a thing that has a body. And it's true that you could say, \"I relate to my body so strongly--that is, due to the fact that I grasp to it so strongly--that I get angry when all these many pains do harm to it.\" And yet when someone criticizes you, or says some harsh things to you, their words with their unpleasant sound can do not even the least physical harm to you. Why is it then, my mind, that you feel such fury? It's completely wrong to feel any anger. Contemplation Fourteen What to do if someone tries to hurt the teaching or a teacher"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:3696", "course": "C11", "seq": 277, "wylie": "byang chub sems dpa' snying rje'i bsam pa dag pa des lus gtong ba la lus kyi sdug bsngal med de, sgo gsum gyi sdig pa mtha' dag spangs pa'i phyir lus gtong ba'i dus la mkhas pa'i phyir na yid la mi dga' ba yang med la, rgyu mtshan 'di ltar gang zag gi bdag dang bdag gir zhen pa'i log par rtog pa dang , srog gcod sogs sdig pa'i sems dang lus la gnod pa yin gyi sems dpa' chen po rnams la gnod pa'i rgyu log pas so", "english": "Bodhisattvas who have reached the point where their thoughts of compassion are completely pure feel no pain in their bodies when they give them away. This is the case since they have stopped each and every kind of bad deed. Neither when they give their bodies away is there any kind of dislike for the act, because they are wise in knowing when it is right for them to do so. This is due to the fact--this is caused by the reason--that thinking of things the wrong way (believing that a person or the things which belong to a person could ever have any self-nature), along with doing negative deeds such as taking life and the rest, harm the body and mind; and great bodhisattvas have managed to stop these sources of harm. Contemplation Fifteen The use of power"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:4002", "course": "C12", "seq": 99, "wylie": "'o na mi rtag sogs mthong ba de nyid mthong bar bshad pa dang 'gal zhe na mi 'gal te, 'jig rten pa gtsang bde rtag sogs su zhen pa la ltos nas de nyid mthong bas bzhed pa tsam yin pa'i phyir, de las gzhan du 'jig rten na grags tshad tshad ma yin na bud med mi gtsang bar nges par rtog pa mi sdug pa sgom pa'i rnal 'byor pa la bud med gtsang bar zhen pa'i 'jig rten gyis gnod par thal bar 'gyur ro", "english": "One may continue with the following objection: But isn't it contradictory to say something like, \"To see that things are changing and such is to see thusness itself\"? It is not. This is only talking about the fact that we can see a \"thusness\" or a real nature of certain things relative to what the world wrongly believes about them--where the world believes, for example, that things are pure, happy, unchanging, or the like. If this were not the case, and if everything that the world agreed to by the conventions of the world were totally correct, then the belief of the world that a woman's body is something pure would have to disprove the perception of a high practitioner who is meditating upon the fact of repulsiveness, and who ascertains correctly that a woman's body is something impure. Contemplation Nine Empty Virtues Do Work Perfectly"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:4092", "course": "C12", "seq": 189, "wylie": "gal te bdag 'ga' rang bzhin gyis grub pa yod na ni der zhen pa las yul ci yang rung ba las 'jigs pa skye rigs par 'gyur na bdag nyid 'ga' yang rang bzhin gyis grub pa cung zad kyang yod pa min pas 'jigs par 'gyur ba po de su zhig yin te, rang bzhin sems pa'i blos kha nang du log la soms shig dang bdag med pa khong du chud pas 'jigs pa mtha' dag las grol bar 'gyur ba yin no", "english": "Only if it were true that there were any self-nature of anything at all then would it be right for you to feel fear towards any object at all, since this fear comes from believing in a self-nature. But since it is not the case that anything has any nature at all which exists by nature, how could there be anyone who is afraid in the first place? Take this state of mind where you think that things have any nature of their own, and turn it around: look inside, and think! You will come to comprehend fully what it means when we say that nothing is itself at all, and you will liberate yourself from every fear there could ever be. An Outline of the Explanation of the Chapter on Wisdom from the Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life, to accompany the Contemplations in Reading Four b. A proof that, even if all you hope to do is to reach freedom, you must still realize emptiness i) The opponent's argument [Contemplation Sixteen begins here] ii) Our own response a1. Proving that it is only the wisdom that realizes emptiness which is the path that can liberate one from a suffering existence a2. Proving this fact by using scripture to prove that the scriptures of the greater way are the word of the Buddha [Contemplation Sixteen ends here] b2. Proving this fact through logic a3. Proving it through a parallel argument [Contemplation Seventeen is found here] b3. Proving it through specific reasoning a4. A demonstration that it is impossible to become an enemy destroyer or to reach nirvana wi"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:4101", "course": "C12", "seq": 198, "wylie": "gzugs bdag ma yin par gsungs pa sogs dang don gcig pas 'jig lta lhan skyes kyi dmigs rnam gnyis kyi dmigs pa ni las 'bras kyi rten du gyur pa'i nga tsam dang nga yi ba'i rang ldog tsam yin la de la 'jig ltas nga dang nga yi ba rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub par zhen pa yin pas nga rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub na de'i mtshan gzhir phung po'i tshogs pa dang rgyun dang de'i ya gyal dang cha shes dang , de rnams las ngo bo tha dad pa gang rung gcig de'i mtshan gzhir sgrub dgos la de rnams de ltar ma grub pa'i phyir ces 'chad pa yin no", "english": "The point here is the same as in places where, for example, it's stated that the physical body is not the self. As such, the things focused upon for the two objects that are pictured in the mind during the innate form of the view of destruction are the simple \"me\" which serves as the basis for the workings of karma and its consequences, as well as the simple thing which is delineated as \"mine.\" The view of destruction focuses upon these things and believes them to be a \"me\" and \"mine\" which exist by definition. Given all this, then if the \"me\" were to exist by definition, it would also be true that the collection of the heaps, and their continued existence, and all its components and parts, and anything completely separate from these things at all, any of them, would have to constitute what \"me\" refers to. The fact though is that none of these things constitutes anything of the kind. This is what is being expressed at this point."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:4215", "course": "C12", "seq": 312, "wylie": "'khor ba'i sdug bsngal las grol ba'i rgyur smon pa ni bdag nam zhig chos thams cad rang bzhin gyis stong bar rtogs pa dmigs pa med pa'i shes rab dang ldan pa'i tshul du gus par de'i thabs sbyin pa la sogs pa'i bsod nams kyi tshogs mtha' yas pa bsags te bden par zhen pa'i dmigs pas 'khor bar phung bar 'gyur ba'i sems can rnams la 'khor ba'i sdug bsngal zhi ba'i ched du stong pa nyid ni ston par 'gyur snyam nas sems can rnams 'khor ba'i sdug bsngal dang bral na, bral ba de bdag gis bya'o snyam pa'i snying rje chen po bsgom par bya'o", "english": "Here is a prayer that we become the cause for their liberation from suffering: When is it that I will come to realize that every single object which exists is completely devoid of any nature of its own? When will I come to have the wisdom that has no focus [towards things as self-existent]? And when will I, with great respect, go about the task of accumulating infinite masses of merit, acts of giving and the rest, using this wisdom as a method to achieve the goals? Living beings are all devastated here in the cycle of suffering by their tendency to focus on things and believe that they have some true existence. When is it that I will be able to teach them the concept of emptiness, in order to help them put a stop to all the sufferings of the cycle? Meditate thus on great compassion, think to yourself: What if it were true that every living being could be freed from the sufferings of this cycle of life? May I free them myself!"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5358", "course": "C14", "seq": 95, "wylie": "ces gsungs pa'i don la dpyad pas pha rol tu phyin pa'i lam gyi nyams len thams cad zhen pa bzhi dang bral ba'i blo sbyong du 'du bar dgongs te, chos thams cad la nges shes khyad par can thob pa yin no", "english": "And the Sachen thought carefully about the meaning of these words. And he came to realize that the entire practice of the path of the perfections could all be found here, in these words for developing the good heart, called \"Freedom from the Four Attachments.\" And thus did he come to an extraordinary level of understanding all the things there are."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5366", "course": "C14", "seq": 103, "wylie": "tshul khrims la med thabs mi 'dug ste, ,tshe 'di la zhen pa'i tshul khrims de, ,chos brgyad bsgrub pa'i rtsa ba can, ,tshul khrims ngan la gshe ba can, ,tshul khrims ldan la phrag dog can, ,rang gi tshul khrims ngo phag can, ,ngan 'gro bsgrub pa'i sa bon can, ,bcos ma'i tshul khrims shol la zhog", "english": "There's no way you can do without Living the ethical life. But if you do so Because you're attached to goals of this life, Then you've planted the roots for living in The eight worldly thoughts. You'll disparage those whose ethics are less. You'll feel jealous of those who keep Their ethics well. The ethics you follow yourself Will be done for the recognition of others. You will plant the seeds for the lower realms. You will slip into being a person Whose ethical life is a sham."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5368", "course": "C14", "seq": 105, "wylie": "thos bsam la med thabs ma gda' ste, ,tshe 'di la zhen pa'i thos bsam de, ,nga rgyal bsgrub pa'i longs spyod can, ,thos bsam dman la brnyas pa can, ,thos bsam ldan la phrag dog can, ,'khor dang longs spyod chol ba can, ,ngan 'gro bsgrub pa'i rtsa ba can, ,chos brgyad kyi thos bsam shol la zhog", "english": "There's no way you can do without Learning and contemplation. But a person Whose learning and contemplation are done Attached to worldly kinds of goals Is only gaining the resources which Will allow them to reach the state of pride. They will speak badly of those whose learning And contemplation are less than theirs. They will be jealous of others Whose learning and contemplation are good. The people around them, and all they own, Will never be very stable. They are planting roots to grow As a birth in the lower realms. They have slipped into learning and contemplation That is lost to the eight worldly thoughts."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5639", "course": "C15", "seq": 88, "wylie": "ngo bo nyid med par gsungs pa'i ngo bo nyid med tshul ni de ltar du bshad kyi de lta min par ngo bo nyid gsum ga rang gi mtshan nyid kyis ma grub pa la ngo bo nyid med par bshad na ngo bo nyid med par gsungs pa'i mdo sde la sgra ji bzhin par zhen pa yin la, de lta na med lta'am chad par lta ba thob par 'gyur te ngo bo nyid gsum ga la skur ba 'debs pas mtshan nyid med par lta ba can du 'gyur ba'i phyir ro,", "english": "This is the way one should explain how it is that things lack any nature of their own when the sutra speaks of a \"lack of any nature of their own.\" If on the other hand one were to say that \"lacking any nature of their own\" meant that none of the three natures existed by definition, then you would be expressing the belief that the sutras which state that nothing has any nature of its own are to be taken to mean exactly what they say. This would amount to espousing the view that nothing exists, or the view that everything has discontinued. This in turn would be discounting the existence of all three of the natures; and we could say then that you had turned into one of those people who holds the view that nothing has any definitive characteristics at all."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5643", "course": "C15", "seq": 92, "wylie": "de ltar yang dgongs 'grel las, nga'i dgongs te bshad pa zab mo yang dag pa ji lta ba bzhin tu rab tu mi shes te chos de la mos kyang chos 'di dag thams cad ni ngo bo nyid med pa kho na yin no, , chos 'di dag thams cad ni ma skyes pa kho na'o, , ma 'gags pa kho na'o, , gzod ma nas zhi ba kho na'o, , rang bzhin gyis yongs su mya ngan las 'das pa kho na'o zhes chos kyi don la sgra ji bzhin kho nar mngon par zhen par byed do,", "english": "In this same vein, the Commentary on the True Intent says: I will explain to you my true intent. It may be the case that you believe in things, that you fail to grasp fully the profound and pure way that things really are. And then you will come to believe, firmly, that I only meant exactly what I said about the nature of all things when I said the following: None of these things at all has any nature of its own; and they are no other way. None of these things at all ever grows; and they are no other way. None of them ever stops; and they are no other way. They are extinct, and have been so from the very beginning; and they are no other way. They have, by their very nature, gone completely beyond the state of grief; and they are no other way."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5723", "course": "C15", "seq": 172, "wylie": "de'i phyir kha cig gis mdo 'di la brten nas dus gsum par gsungs pa'i mdo thams cad nges don du bsgrubs nas gzhan sde'i rigs can bdag tu smra ba la zhen pa rnams drang ba'i phyir du gsungs pa 'ga' zhig sgra ji bzhin par 'dod cing , chos nyid ma gtogs pa'i chos can thams cad 'khrul pa'i blos rlom pa ma gtogs pa rang gi ngo bo grub pa cung zad kyang med cing chos nyid bden par grub pa'i bden mi bden rnam par phye ba ni sngar bshad pa'i legs par rnam par phye ba'i don du 'dod do,", "english": "Given all this, some have used the wording of this sutra to go on and claim that it proves that everything which Lord Buddha taught during all the periods is meant to be taken literally. These people would then have to say that certain statements which the Buddha made to attract those of other religions who still believed that things could have some self-nature are teachings that we are meant to take on face value. They also say that no object but the real nature of things is anything more than the simple delusion of a mistaken state of mind; these other things have not the slightest bit of an existing nature to them. They say finally that the meaning of \"fine distinctions\" is the distinction between what exists in truth or not, in the sense of being this one true thing: the real nature of things."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5820", "course": "C15", "seq": 269, "wylie": "tshig gis btags pa'i ngo bo de nyid rang gi mtshan nyid kyis yod pa min pa la de'i rang gi mtshan nyid yod do zhes zhen pa ni sgro 'dogs so,", "english": "The act of concocting things then consists of a believing that this nature constructed through the use of words--something which in fact does not exist by definition--does exist by definition."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5834", "course": "C15", "seq": 283, "wylie": "des na gzhan dbang gi skye 'gag blo 'khrul pas skye 'gag tu zhen pa tsam gyi ngor yin pas kun rdzob tu skye 'gag yod pas skur 'debs su mi 'gyur ro zhes pas lan mi thebs te", "english": "Don't respond to us then by saying that--since the growing and stopping of dependent things is only something that exists to a mistaken state of mind which is imagining that things are growing and stopping--growing and stopping are things that exist, in a deceptive way; and that therefore there is no discounting of these things occurring here."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5835", "course": "C15", "seq": 284, "wylie": "thag pa la sbrul du zhen pa'i 'khrul ngor thag pa sbrul yin la spyir thag pa sbrul du grub ma myong zhes pa dang 'dra bar gzhan dbang gi rgyu 'bras kyang rgyu 'bras bden 'dzin gyi 'khrul ngor rgyu 'bras yin gyi, gzhan dbang kho rang rgyu 'bras su ma grub ces 'dod na ni de 'dra khas blangs kyang dge sdig las bde sdug skye ba'i las 'bras gzhag sa med par song bas skur 'debs spong mi nus la", "english": "Suppose you said something like \"A rope is a snake to a mistaken state of mind which is imagining the rope to be a snake, but generally speaking there's never been a rope that was a snake.\" This is exactly what you're saying here too: \"The causes and effects involved in dependent things are causes and effects to a mistaken state of mind, to the state of mind in which you hold causes and effects to exist truly, but they are not causes and effects for dependent things as such.\" You may say this is what you believe, but it doesn't release you from the charge of discounting things; there is no way then you can set forth the laws of karma and its consequences: the fact that pleasure and pain, respectively, come from good and bad deeds."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5865", "course": "C15", "seq": 314, "wylie": "gzhan yang bsdu ba las, de la gzhan gyi dbang gi ngo bo nyid dang yongs su grub pa la kun brtags pa'i ngo bo nyid du mngon par zhen pa gang yin pa de ni sgro 'dogs pa'i mtha' yin par rig par bya'o zhes dang", "english": "Moreover, the Compendium says: You should understand that any tendency where you focus on the nature known as \"dependent things\" and the nature known as \"totality\" and imagine them to be the nature known as \"constructs\" constitutes the extreme view of concocting things."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5875", "course": "C15", "seq": 324, "wylie": "khyad par du gzhan dbang tha snyad du yod pa'i don 'khrul pa'i blos de la skye 'gag sogs yod par zhen pa tsam yin gyi, dngos po la skye 'gag sogs med do zhes 'dod pa ni, gzhan dbang la skur 'debs kyi mthar thug de'i rgyu mtshan gyis ngo bo nyid gzhan gnyis la yang skur pa btab pas mtshan nyid gsum ga la skur 'debs chad lta'i gtso bor sngar byang sa las bshad pa de yin zhing , mdo sde dgongs 'grel nges don yin par 'dod pa'i phyogs la spang du med pa'i 'gal bar shes par gyis shig", "english": "Consider especially the position that--when we speak of dependent things as existing nominally--what we mean is that a mistaken state of mind merely imagines that growing and stopping apply to them; and that qualities like growing and stopping don't even exist with functional things. This is the most extreme possible version of discounting dependent things, and for this reason it moreover constitutes discounting the other two natures as well. Being therefore a discounting of all three of the attributes, it is exactly the viewpoint which the Levels of the Bodhisattva mentioned above as being the primary form of the view that all things have stopped. You should finally understand that this is idea would be an inescapable contradiction for anyone who held the position that the Commentary on the True Thought was meant literally. 127 The Asian Classics Institute Course XV: What the Buddha Really Meant Reading Nine: Interpretations of the Independent Group of the Middle-Way School There is no one section of Je Tsongkapa's root text on the Essence of Eloquence that easily presents all the concepts of the Independent group of the Middle-Way School on the subjects covered in the course so far. We therefore begin a group of selections, many from monastic textbooks, which together give us a good overview of the relevant ideas. The first part of the reading helps understand the differences between the Independent group, the Mind-Only School, and the Consequence group on the question of w"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5892", "course": "C15", "seq": 341, "wylie": "sgyu ma mkhan gyis rde shing rta glang du sprul pa'i tshe, sngags rdzas kyis mig bslad pa'i ltad mo ba rnams la rde shing rta glang du snang ba dang zhen pa gnyis yod", "english": "In this situation, where a magician makes a stick appear as a horse or cow, two things apply to the members of the audience whose eyes are affected by the magic words and powder: the stick is appearing as a horse or cow, and they believe that it is."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5893", "course": "C15", "seq": 342, "wylie": "sgyu ma mkhan rang nyid la rta glang du snang ba tsam yod kyang , zhen pa med sngags rdzas kyis mig ma bslad pa'i phyis kyi ltad mo ba la rde shing rta glang du snang zhen gnyis ka med pa de bzhin du gzugs sogs kyi chos rnams kyi steng du snang zhen mi 'dra ba gsum 'byung ste", "english": "The only condition that applies to the magician himself is that a horse or cow is appearing to him; he does not believe in them. And those members of the audience who showed up later--those whose eyes were not affected by the magic words or powder--have neither the horse or cow appearing to them, nor any belief in the horse or cow. These same three different permutations apply as well to physical matter and all the other existing objects."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5894", "course": "C15", "seq": 343, "wylie": "stong nyid rtogs ma myong ba'i so so skye bo rnams la, gzugs sogs kyi chos rnams bden grub tu snang ba dang zhen pa gnyis ka yod", "english": "Consider \"common\" people: those who have not yet had their first experience of the perception of emptiness. Both situations apply to them for physical matter and all other existing objects: these things appear to them to exist truly, and they believe in the way they appear."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:5895", "course": "C15", "seq": 344, "wylie": "dag sa la gnas pa'i byang sems rnams kyi rjes thob kyi ngor chos rnams bden grub tu snang ba yod kyang zhen pa med de, gnas lugs mngon sum du rtogs pa'i slob pa 'phags pa rnams la, gzugs sogs kyi chos rnams la bden grub kyi snang zhen gnyis ka med pa'i phyir", "english": "Consider now bodhisattvas who have reached one of the pure levels. Even though objects appear to their minds, during what we call the \"subsequent period,\" as something which exists truly, they have no belief in them this way. And this is because neither situation applies to realized beings who are not yet Buddhas and who are perceiving the real nature of things directly; that is, physical matter and other objects do not appear to them as if they existed truly, and they do not believe that these objects exist that way."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:6080", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:156"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:6084", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:162"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:6096", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:177"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:6105", "course": "C16", "seq": 87, "wylie": "tshe blos gtong zhes pa'i blos gtong rgyu'i gtso bo 'di snang chos brgyad kyi zhen pa de blos thong ba dgos, de thongs na yo byad thams cad gtor nas sprang po byed pa zhig nges par mi dgos te, dam pa tshos tshe blos thongs pa'i tshad la rgyal mchog bskal bzang rgya mtsho dang , paN chen blo bzang ye shes sogs 'jog par mdzad pa yin", "english": "Now when we say to \"give up on this life,\" the main thing that you have to give up is those eight worldly thoughts or attachments, towards the pleasures of this life. Giving up these thoughts doesn't necessarily mean that you have to throw away all your material possessions and become a beggar. Holy teachers of the past have pointed out for us examples of people who succeeded in giving up on life, and these have included personages of fantastic material wealth such as Gyalchok Kelsang Gyatso and the Panchen Lobsang Yeshe.32 21 Lord Maitreya about Giving up on Life"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:6110", "course": "C16", "seq": 92, "wylie": "zhes gsungs pa ltar 'jig rten chos brgyad blos btang ste sgrub pa nyams len gsha' ma zhig yong ba la dal 'byor don che rnyed dka' dang , 'chi ba mi rtag pa gnyis kyi rtogs pa skye ba zhig dgos, de skyes na ri thams cad gser dang , chu thams cad 'o ma, mi thams cad rang gi bran du gyur kyang mi mkho ba skyug nad can la btso zan byin pa ltar zhen pa gting nas log pa zhig yong , rtogs pa de yang thos byung gzhan stobs kyis skyes pas mi chog par, bsam byung rang stobs kyis skyes na gzhan du mi 'gyur bar brtan po 'ong ba yin", "english": "The point here is that, to rid yourself of the eight worldly thoughts and undertake a spiritual practice which is truly pure, you must gain two different realizations: first, of how valuable and hard to find one's life of leisure and fortune is; secondly, of one's own impermanence and the fact that he must die. Once you gain these realizations, it doesn't matter--the hills can turn to gold, the rivers into milk, and every man your slave--but to you it's all repulsive, useless, like a feast set before a sick man vomiting. And it's not enough for these realizations to come to you just from the outside--from sitting and listening to someone describe them. They must come from the inside, from thinking about them yourself. Then they will be firm in your mind, and never change again. 25 How Rare a Life Like This Is"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:6280", "course": "C16", "seq": 262, "wylie": "sgyu ma mkhan gyis rde shing rta glang du sprul ba'i tshe, sngags rdzas kyis mig bslad pa'i ltad mo ba rnams la rde shing rta glang du snang ba dang zhen pa gnyis yod, sgyu ma mkhan rang nyid la rta glang du snang ba tsam yod kyang , zhen pa med sngags rdzas kyis mig ma bslad pa'i phyis kyi ltad mo ba la rde shing rta glang du snang zhen gnyis ka med pa de bzhin du gzugs sogs kyi chos rnams kyi steng du snang zhen mi 'dra ba gsum 'byung ste, stong nyid rtogs ma myong ba'i so so skye bo rnams la, gzugs sogs kyi chos rnams bden grub tu snang ba dang zhen pa gnyis ka yod, dag sa la gnas pa'i byang sems rnams kyi rjes thob kyi ngor chos rnams bden grub tu snang ba yod kyang zhen pa med de, gnas lugs mngon sum du rtogs pa'i slob pa 'phags pa rnams la, gzugs sogs kyi chos rnams la bden grub kyi snang zhen gnyis ka med pa'i phyir", "english": "Suppose a magician makes a little piece of wood appear as a horse or cow. Spectators whose eyes have been affected by his spell both see the piece of wood as a horse or cow and believe that it really is. The magician himself only sees the horse or cow; he has no belief that it is real. A spectator who arrives later, who hasn't had the spell cast on him, neither sees the piece of wood as a horse or cow nor believes that it is. Three different combinations of seeing and believing exist as well with physical form and other such phenomena. The kind of people we call \"common\" people, those who have never had a realization of emptiness, both see and believe that form and the rest really exist. Bodhisattvas who are at one of the pure levels see phenomena as really existing during the periods following emptiness meditation; but they do not believe it. Realized beings who are not yet Buddhas, and who are in the state where they are realizing the way things are directly, neither see physical form and other such phenomena as really existing, nor do they believe that they really exist. 28 Difference between the Two Middle-Way Groups"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:6810", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:1597"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:7099", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:2018"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:7709", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:3285"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:7710", "course": "C17", "seq": 672, "wylie": "spang gnyen la chags sdang dang spang bya la khon du 'dzin pa nyid nyon mongs yin pas spang byar 'gyur ro zhe na, gnyen po la zhen pa dang spang bya la khon du 'dzin pa rnam pa de 'dra'i nyon mongs pa ltar snang ba ni nyon mongs 'joms par byed pa'i gnyen po'i phyogs yin pas spang byar ma gtogs so, , 'grel par phyis de yang gzhom byar bshad pa ni spang bya zad pa na spang gnyen g-yul sprod mi dgos pa'i don to", "english": "Someone may ask the following question: \"You seem to be describing some kind of bias in the attitude we should have towards the antidotes that eliminate our mental afflictions, and you have spoken about hating the thing that the antidote is supposed to eliminate. Aren't these types of thoughts themselves just another kind of mental affliction--that is, the very thing which we are trying to eliminate?\" These kinds of attitudes--of being attached to the antidotes for mental affliction, and of hating the mental afflictions we are trying to eliminate--are themselves only apparent mental afflictions. Because they are included into the antidote side--that is, because they are part of what acts to destroy the mental afflictions--they are not counted among the objects which we seek to eliminate from our minds. There are commentaries which do state that these are themselves something to be destroyed later, but what they mean by saying this is that, once one has finished off all the objects to be eliminated, one need no longer make war. 8 The Power of Resolve"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:7921", "course": "C18", "seq": 126, "wylie": "byang chub sems dpa' snying rje'i bsam pa dag pa des lus gtong ba la lus kyi sdug bsngal med de, sgo gsum gyi sdig pa mtha' dag spangs pa'i phyir lus gtong ba'i dus la mkhas pa'i phyir na yid la mi dga' ba yang med la, rgyu mtshan 'di ltar gang zag gi bdag dang bdag gir zhen pa'i log par rtog pa dang , srog gcod sogs sdig pa'i sems dang lus la gnod pa yin gyi sems dpa' chen po rnams la gnod pa'i rgyu log pas so", "english": "Bodhisattvas who have reached the point where their thoughts of compassion are completely pure feel no pain in their bodies when they give them away. This is the case since they have stopped each and every kind of bad deed. Neither when they give their bodies away is there any kind of dislike for the act, because they are wise in knowing when it is right for them to do so. This is due to the fact--this is caused by the reason--that thinking of things the wrong way (believing that a person or the things which belong to a person could ever have any self-nature), along with doing negative deeds such as taking life and the rest, harm the body and mind; and great bodhisattvas have managed to stop these sources of harm. Contemplation Fourteen The use of power"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8092", "course": "C18", "seq": 297, "wylie": "gal te bdag 'ga' rang bzhin gyis grub pa yod na ni der zhen pa las yul ci yang rung ba las 'jigs pa skye rigs par 'gyur na bdag nyid 'ga' yang rang bzhin gyis grub pa cung zad kyang yod pa min pas 'jigs par 'gyur ba po de su zhig yin te, rang bzhin sems pa'i blos kha nang du log la soms shig dang bdag med pa khong du chud pas 'jigs pa mtha' dag las grol bar 'gyur ba yin no", "english": "Only if it were true that there were any self-nature of anything at all then would it be right for you to feel fear towards any object at all, since this fear comes from believing in a self-nature. But since it is not the case that anything has any nature at all which exists by nature, how could there be anyone who is afraid in the first place? Take this state of mind where you think that things have any nature of their own, and turn it around: look inside, and think! You will come to comprehend fully what it means when we say that nothing is itself at all, and you will liberate yourself from every fear there could ever be. Contemplation Sixteen The Two Kinds of Grasping to Self-Existence"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8101", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:4101"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8193", "course": "C18", "seq": 398, "wylie": "'khor ba'i sdug bsngal las grol ba'i rgyur smon pa ni bdag nam zhig chos thams cad rang bzhin gyis stong bar rtogs pa dmigs pa med pa'i shes rab dang ldan pa'i tshul du gus par de'i thabs sbyin pa la sogs pa'i bsod nams kyi tshogs mtha' yas pa bsags te bden par zhen pa'i dmigs pas 'khor bar phung bar 'gyur ba'i sems can rnams la 'khor ba'i sdug bsngal zhi ba'i ched du stong pa nyid ni ston par 'gyur snyam nas sems can rnams 'khor ba'i sdug bsngal dang bral na, bral ba de bdag gis bya'o snyam pa'i snying rje chen po bsgom par bya'o", "english": "Here is a prayer that we become the cause for their liberation from suffering: When is it that I will come to realize that every single object which exists is completely devoid of any nature of its own? When will I come to have the wisdom that has no focus [towards things as self- existent]? And when will I, with great respect, go about the task of accumulating infinite masses of merit, acts of giving and the rest, using this wisdom as a method to achieve the goals? Living beings are all devastated here in the cycle of suffering by their tendency to focus on things and believe that they have some true existence. When is it that I will be able to teach them the concept of emptiness, in order to help them put a stop to all the sufferings of the cycle? Meditate thus on great compassion, think to yourself: What if it were true that every living being could be freed from the sufferings of this cycle of life? May I free them myself!"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8632", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5358"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8640", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5366"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8642", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5368"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8788", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5639"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8792", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5643"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8826", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5723"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8859", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5820"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8887", "course": "C18", "seq": 1092, "wylie": "sgyu ma mkhan gyis rde shing rta glang du sprul pa'i tshe, sngags rdzas kyis mig bslad pa'i ltad mo ba rnams la rde shing rta glang du snang ba dang zhen pa gnyis yod", "english": "In this situation, where a magician makes a stick appear as a horse or cow, two things apply to the members of the audience whose eyes are affected by the magic words and powder: they stick is appearing as a horse or cow, and they believe that it is."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8888", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5893"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8889", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5894"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:8890", "fields_equal_to": "corpus_segments:5895"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:35149", "course": "DDA", "seq": 66, "wylie": "bya byed rkyen la bltos bzhin du, ,bden par snang ba ya re mtshan, ,bden par zhen pa de bas mtshar, ,mtshar yang zhen pas aa thang chad", "english": "If you think about it, it's passingly strange That the workings of things can appear to us As if all of them were real, Even as they must still depend Upon their conditions to happen. The fact that we then believe they're real Is something even more strange; Strange but also sad, In the way this belief exhausts us. Holding that the pen comes from its own side causes immeasurable exhaustion, over the entire length of our life.  Over and over we try to make the things we want to happen happen, working to manipulate players who are not even there—who never were there."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:35150", "course": "DDA", "seq": 67, "wylie": "byis pa rgas pa'i rgan po de, ,skyes tsam nyid nas rgan po rang, ,grub grub 'dra ba'i snang ba dang, ,de la zhen pa nyid dang mtshungs", "english": "An old man is a boy grown old; But a boy who was old in actual fact From the moment he was born; And yet it seems to us That he grows old gradually. The way we believe now the world is real Is exactly the same as how we believe That the boy is how he appears to be. What really happens as we pass through a doorway?  A picture of a smaller doorway flies out; then a picture of a larger doorway as we pass through it; and then a final picture of another smaller doorway as we walk on to where the door leads. Aging is the same.  An avoidable tragedy."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:35204", "course": "DDA", "seq": 121, "wylie": "de ltar bden pa bden 'dzin yin, ,de ltar zhen pa bden zhen yin, ,de ltar snang ba bden snang yin, ,phyi ma sa bcu bar du 'brang, ,shes sgrib zer ba'i ming yang btags", "english": "This kind of real Is to believe things are real; This kind of grasping Is to grasp things as real; This way of appearing Is to appear as though real— And it follows us all the way on up To the tenth bodhisattva level. It goes as well by the name Of an “obstacle to omniscience.” Even as we go through the steps of meditating correctly on myself, we are at the same moment holding the self that we're focused on to exist from its own side.  Because the meditation is accurate, it places cracks in our innate tendency to believe that—just like the pen—I am coming from my own side.  But because we are necessarily focusing on elements of the meditation in our old way, we are as always reinforcing this mistaken tendency, off into the future."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:35309", "course": "DDA", "seq": 226, "wylie": "ma rig pa yi don gcig tshang, ,'khor ba 'di la mtha' med pas, ,'gro ba lnga por skyes pa'i tshe, ,re re ltar gyi phung po la, ,dmigs nas bden par grub pa yi, ,'dzin stangs so sor skyes pa dang, ,de yang ltos med 'gyur med dang, ,rag ma las par khyod zhen pa'i, ,zhen pa gzhan du mi 'gyur bzhin", "english": "Where this one thing Stands complete— Where we misunderstand our world— The cycle of pain continues on, The cycle never-ending. And in it we each are born Into each of the five different Forms of life; And in each individual life We look upon Each body and mind And hold them to exist in truth. It seems as though The way you grasp to things— As depending on nothing else at all, As relying on nothing else there is— Is as well itself a belief That will have to be immutable! How we view our body and mind—in each lifetime we live—forces us to enter more & more bodies and minds of the same kind: suffering.  The cycle of these lifetimes is here described as “never-ending”; but this only applies when we are still misunderstanding where everything around us comes from. There will come a day—soon, if we work to understand the lines of The Cantos—that this otherwise never-ending cycle of pain will finally and perfectly end. The “five different forms of life” mentioned here are the five (and only five) choices of mind & body that we can ever be born into, so long as we misunderstand where things come from: human; animal; hungry ghost; hellbeing; and pleasure being—which would then include their “lesser cousin” pleasure beings. By the way, it's not at all that the Devil (nor we) specifically believe that nothing depends upon anything else.  The Devil knows, as we all do, that apple trees depend on apple seeds.  But remember that these are apple trees as we think of them; and apple seeds a"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32766", "course": "EM", "seq": 58, "wylie": "des na rje khol ltar phung po dang mtshan nyid mi mthun par rang rkya thub par snang ba de bzhin du yod par zhen pa ni rdzas su yod par 'dzin pa'o", "english": "Thus we can say that what it means to believe that the person is “substantial” is when you have this deluded idea of a master and a servant: you believe that—when the person appears to exist in a self-standing way, with a nature which is inconsistent with that of the person's parts—then it must really be as it appears."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32840", "course": "EM", "seq": 132, "wylie": "nus te, bshad ma thag pa ltar gzugs sogs rang 'dzin rtog pa'i zhen gzhir rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub par khegs pa na, de'i tshe snang ba ltar zhen pa'i rtog pa de zhen yul la 'khrul par 'grub la", "english": "Here's how it's done. As I've just explained, we can disprove the way in which we tend to think that things like form exist, by definition, as the objects of our perceptions. And we thus further prove that these thoughts are mistaken towards what they are considering; believing that they exist as they appear to."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32906", "course": "EM", "seq": 198, "wylie": "sgyu ma mkhan rang nyid la gzhi de rta glang du snang ba yod kyang zhen pa med", "english": "[1] The stone or stick that they have used as the basis of the illusion does indeed appear to the magician themselves as though it were a real horse or elephant—but they don't believe the animal is real."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:33478", "course": "EM", "seq": 770, "wylie": "de la sbyin pa la sogs pa bsten pa dgag pa ni ma yin gyi, ngar 'dzin pa dang, nga yir 'dzin pa la sems mngon par zhen pa, gzung ba dang 'dzin pa la sems mngon par zhen pa, dmigs pa can gyi sbyin pa la sogs pa phyin ci log tu mngon par zhen pa gang yin pa de dgag pa ste, phyin ci log tu mngon par zhen pas kun nas bslang ba'i sbyin pa la sogs pa yongs su dag par mi 'gyur te bdud kyi las so zhes bshad do", "english": "These statements are not meant to reject engaging in the practices of giving and the rest. Rather, they are meant to reject believing in things in the forms of grasping on to some kind of “me,” or some “mine”; believing in self-existent objects that are held by awareness, and self-existent awarenesses that hold to those objects; giving which involves some self-existent object of perception; and all of the like: any and all forms of a mistaken belief, in the self-existence of things. The point they are making is that acts such as that of giving—when they are motivated by a mistaken belief in things—are no longer pure acts, and are thus the work of the demons."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:24344", "course": "GIE", "seq": 832, "wylie": "[b35] rna ba la sogs pa'i dbang po lnga yid kyis byin gyis brlabs pas yongs su gzung ba'i yul sgra la sogs pa dag la blos zhen par byed la, de nas blos zhen par byas pa'i don la skyes bus sems par byed do", "english": "The ear and the rest of the five powers, inspired by the mental sense power, cause the mind to yearn towards sound and the rest: the objects that they hold.  And then the soul turns its thoughts towards the objects that the mind has been yearning for."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:24375", "course": "GIE", "seq": 863, "wylie": "[b66] rna ba la sogs pa'i blo'i dbang po yid kyis byin gyis brlabs pa dag gis yongs su bzung ba'i yul sgra la sogs pa dag la blos zhen par byed la de nas blos zhen par byas pa'i don la skyes bu sems par byed de, de ltar skyes bu sems pa yod pa'i rang gi ngo bo yin pa'i phyir", "english": "The ear and the other sense powers, inspired by the mental sense power, cause the mind to yearn towards sound and the rest: the objects that they hold.  And then the soul turns its thoughts towards the objects that the mind has been yearning for.  Thus it is that the soul becomes something with a nature of possessing thinking."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:27256", "course": "GK", "seq": 308, "wylie": "[d12] ngag don ni, lhan cig dmigs nges kyi rtags las sngon po sngo snang dbang shes dang rdzas gzhan min par nges pa'i blo chos can, khyod kyis sngon po phyi rol gyi don du zhen pa'i sgro 'dogs kun brtags mngon gyur mgo gnon nus te, khyad kyis sngon po sems kyi dang gnyid {%kyi bdag nyid} yin par nges pa'i blo tshad ma gzhan la ltos med du 'dren nus pa'i phyir", "english": "Here then is how we express the meaning of the statement here, in a syllogism: Let us consider the state of mind where we ascertain—through a reason which helps us ascertain that they are perceived together—the fact that the blue does not consist of any substance separate from the sense awareness which has taken on an aspect of the blue. This state of mind acts to suppress the manifest appearance of the learned tendency to exaggerate the reality of the situation, where we believe that the blue is an outer object; Because this state has the power to elicit—without depending on any other factor—an accurate state of mind where we ascertain that the blue is part and parcel with the mind itself. The third level of deep practice"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:27457", "course": "ILL", "seq": 138, "wylie": "dang po ni, ngar 'dzin gyi 'jig ltas nga yir 'dzin pa'i 'jig lta skyed pas, sems can 'di rnams ni dang por te bdag gi bar mngon par zhen pa'i 'jig lta'i snga rol tu, ngar 'dzin pa'i 'jig ltas rang bzhin gyis yod pa min pa'i bdag rang bzhin gyis yod do snyam nas, nga zhes pa'i don 'di nyid du ste la bden par mngon par zhen par byed do", "english": "We begin with the first. The version of the view of destruction where we hold to a “me” triggers the version where we hold to some “mine.” Thus all suffering beings first (that is, before they give rise to the view of destruction where they begin wanting what is “mine”) give rise to the view of destruction where they want a “me,” talking about something which is a thing that is itself—which exists “in reality.” This is a view of “me” which thinks to itself that a person who could never exist in & of themselves does exist in & of themselves."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:27697", "course": "ILL", "seq": 378, "wylie": "'dis ni gdags gzhi phung po la bden par zhen pa'i zhen yul sun ma phyin na, btags chos gang zag la bden par 'dzin pa'i zhen yul yang sun mi phyin pas, gang zag bden med du ma rtogs pa'i phyir, gang zag gi bdag med mtshan nyid rdzogs pa ma rtogs par bstan no", "english": "What's being said here is that—if we are not able to use this realization to rip out the object that the belief in the thing we label ourselves (the parts of us) believes is real—then we will fail, in turn, to rip out the object that our tendency to think that things are real believes is real when it focuses on the result of the labeling: the person themselves. And then we will fail to realize that the person has no reality; and then we will fail to reach a realization which is complete in every respect as it sees that the person is not themselves."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:27767", "course": "ILL", "seq": 448, "wylie": "rje btsun gyis yul gang la ji 'dra ba zhig tu dmigs pas, 'khor ba las mi thar ba bshad pa zhus pa'i lan du, bdag ni 'khor ba las 'da' ba dang, myang 'das 'thob par 'gyur ro snyam du bden par zhen pa'i tshul gyis rtog par byed pas, mi rtag pa la sogs pa bsgoms pa na", "english": "And so the Holy One is requesting an explanation of what object a person needs to focus upon—and in what way—in order to fail to free themselves from the cycle of suffering. The response given to him is that there are people who meditate upon the aspects of impermanence and so on, but in a way in which they are imagining to themselves that things are real as they think to themselves, “I will go beyond the cycle of pain; I will reach nirvana.”"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:27866", "course": "ILL", "seq": 547, "wylie": "de la chos kyi dbyings zhes pa ni nyi khri snang ba las, de la rtog pa dang rnam par rtog pa ni dngos po dang de'i mtshan ma la mngon par zhen pa ste, de med pa'i phyir chags pa med pa nyid du rig par bya'o, ,yod par ma gyur pa nyid ni chos thams cad kyi de bzhin nyid do", "english": "As for this expression, “sphere of reality,” we see it explained in the Illumination of the Twenty Thousand: When we talk about “thinking that something is there” or “imagining that something is there,” we're referring to a belief in things, and the indicators of things. And you should understand that—since these don't even exist—the attachment to them doesn't really exist either. The ultimate nature of things is in fact nothing other than this same quality, of not even existing."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:27868", "course": "ILL", "seq": 549, "wylie": "zhes dngos po dang de'i mtshan ma la bden par zhen pa'i chags pas bzung ba ltar yod pa min pa'i bden stong la bshad do", "english": "These lines are describing the “sphere of reality” as the quality of being empty of any true existence, in the sense of something's not existing in the way that it is held to exist by the kind of attachment which believes that things and their indicators exist in truth."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:28199", "course": "ILL", "seq": 880, "wylie": "gsum pa ni, rang ste phra ba'i 'jig lta'i bdag tu lta ba dang 'brel ba ste de sngon du 'gro ba'i bdag dang, sems can sogs rang rkya ba'i rdzas yod du 'dzin pa rags pa'i gang zag gi bdag dang bdag gi bar 'dzin pa dang, phung khams skye mched la bden par zhen pa'i chos kyi bdag 'dzin rnams yongs su zad par 'gyur ro", "english": "This brings us to our third point from above: a description of what it is we rid ourselves of at the fourth level. And then everything related to seeing things as themselves is finished off completely—which is to say, everything related to seeing things as themselves as we do this in the subtle form of the view of destruction. This involves the tendency to believe in a self-nature which is the precursor for this view; the tendency to believe in the gross form of a self-nature to a person in the case where we are holding living beings & such as existing in a self-standing, substantial way (in addition to thinking this way about what is possessed by such a being); and the tendency to believe in a self-nature to the parts of a person: the heaps, the categories, & the doors of sense—thinking that these are real."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:28384", "course": "ILL", "seq": 1065, "wylie": "dang po la, rta glang du snang ba tsam yod kyi der zhen pa med la, gnyis pa la, der snang dang der zhen gnyis ka yod, gsum pa la, rta glang gi snang zhen gnyis ka med do", "english": "The horse or elephant does appear to the first, but nothing more: they don't believe it is real. The animal appears to the second as well, and they also believe it's real. The creature does not appear to the third, nor do they believe it is real."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:28461", "course": "ILL", "seq": 1142, "wylie": "'o na bdag gi 'di zhes zhes pa'i rang 'grel las, 'di ni bdag gi'o snyam du ngar 'dzin pa'i yul las gzhan pa'i dngos po'i rnam pa ma lus pa la mngon par zhen pa yin no, zhes mig la sogs pa'i gzhi la dmigs nas 'di ni bdag gi yin no snyam du zhen pa bdag gir 'dzin par bshad pa ji ltar yin snyam na", "english": "The following question might then arise in ones mind: Now then; at the point where it mentions “We say of them 'mine',” the autocommentary also states that “when we say 'mine,' we hold a false belief in all entities other than the object we hold when we say 'me'.” What about this particular reference, which seems to be saying that when we focus on objects such as the eye and believe in them, wrongly—thinking that “this is mine”—then this is the tendency to hold things as “mine”?"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:28462", "course": "ILL", "seq": 1143, "wylie": "de ni mig sogs rnams bdag gi bar mthong nas bdag gi ba la bden par mngon par zhen pa'i don yin gyi, bdag gi ba'i mtshan gzhi mig sogs dmigs par ston pa min te, de ltar ma yin na 'jig lta dang chos kyi bdag 'dzin gnyis mi 'gal bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro", "english": "The point of this reference though is to say that we see the eye and so on as being something of mine, and then hold the false belief that it is something of mine in a real sense. This is not though meant to indicate that we are directing our perceptions towards the eye and so on as a classical example of the concept of “mine.” If this were not the case, then the two of the view of destruction and the tendency to believe in a self-nature of things would no longer be mutually exclusive."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:28739", "course": "ILL", "seq": 1420, "wylie": "gang zhig gsung rab kyi don phyin ci ma log par ma rtogs shing, 'khor ba thog ma med pa nas dngos po bden 'dzin gyi bag chags bzhag pa smin pa las byung ba'i dngos po la bden par mngon par zhen pa yun ring mo nas 'dris pa'i mdza' bo dang bral ba ste", "english": "And so there are those who have yet to grasp the meaning of the highest of all words in an unerring way; in their hearts, the deep seeds for believing that things are real have been sown, for time with no beginning, here in the cycle of pain. These seeds have ripened, and produced a craving for believing that things are real—and these people must learn to leave behind this friend, who has been so close to them, for so very long."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:29405", "course": "ILL", "seq": 2086, "wylie": "dbu sems gang gi lugs kyis kyang de lta sems can rnams la snang zhing, snang ba ltar du bden par zhen pa'i zhe na {%zhen} gzhi de, zhen yul des stong par bstan pa cig yod na, stong nyid de rtogs pa lam du 'gro ba yin gyi", "english": "It doesn't matter which system we're talking about—that of the Middle Way, or that of the Mind Only. In either case, there is a basis behind our wrong belief: something that appears to living beings to exist in a certain way, and which they subsequently believe to exist in truth, as it appears to. If there is something that we can point to as being empty of the object that people believe they see, then—and only then—the realization of that sheer absence or emptiness can function as a path."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:29442", "course": "ILL", "seq": 2123, "wylie": "de'i phyir phyi rol gyi gzugs kyi skye mched med pa kho na yin zhing, yid kyi rnam par shes pa la phyi rol de'i rnam pa snang ba tsam la phyi rol nyid du mngon par zhen pa ni bzlog tu med par 'byung ngo", "english": "As such, an outer door of visible form can only be something which does not exist. And what's happening is that we are strongly attached to thinking that the awareness of the thought is an aspect of the outer world—that something which is nothing more than the appearance of being outside is the outside world itself. This attachment occurs in a very compelling way that is difficult to reverse."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:29618", "course": "ILL", "seq": 2299, "wylie": "dbu ma pa ltar na zhen tshul ni snang ba la tha snyad pa'i blos bzhag pa min pa'i bden grub tu zhen pa yin la, de'i gnyen por snang ba 'di chos can du bzung nas, de 'dra ba'i bden par med ces 'gog ste", "english": "Those of the Middle Way describe the belief with which we hold to things in a different way. They say that we hold that things exist in reality—which is to say, we believe that what appears to us is not being established by a nominal state of mind. And then as an antidote for this belief, we start by taking this way that things appear to us as the subject under our logical consideration. Then we deny this appearance by saying, “This is not something which exists as real, in the way we have described that.”"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:29619", "course": "ILL", "seq": 2300, "wylie": "de yang dgag gzhi de dgag bya yin pa 'gog pa yin te, sems can gyis zhen pa na gzhi de la dgag bya de don gzhan du yod par 'dzin pa min par, gzhi de dgag bya de'i ngo bor zhen pa'i phyir dang, stong pa yang ji ltar zhen pa de ltar du yod pas stong par bstan dgos pa'i phyir ro", "english": "This denial is a refusal that the objects which make up the foundation state where we are accomplishing our denial could in fact exist as what we are denying about them. This is not to say that when living beings are engaging in what they believe, they hold this foundation state to exist in some other way than that expressed by the object that we deny; rather, they actually hold that this state exists, in its very essence, as expressed by the object that we deny. Moreover, we have to demonstrate as well that emptiness itself is also empty of existing in the way that we might believe it to."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:29949", "course": "ILL", "seq": 2630, "wylie": "de 'di snyam du sems te, byed pa po la mngon par zhen pas las rnams yod par gyur to", "english": "And then this thought occurs to them: “All these kinds of karma came about through the strong belief in some creator.”"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:30384", "course": "ILL", "seq": 3065, "wylie": "'jig ltas gzhi gang la zhen pa 'di'i dmigs pa gang yin snyam du brtags pa na, bdag ste nga zhes pa'i nga ni bdag tu lta ba 'di'i yul dmigs pa'o snyam du rtogs te, ngar 'dzin pa ni bdag gi yul can yin pa'i phyir ro", "english": "One may wonder then just what kind of aspect it is that the view of destruction assumes, when it begins to hold its beliefs about any particular object. And what we come to realize is that what this view thinks it sees is what we have called “the self”—which is to say, a certain kind of “me.” It is the “me” which the view of some self thinks it is focused upon. And that is because the tendency to hold to “me” takes, as its object, a “self.”"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:30417", "course": "ILL", "seq": 3098, "wylie": "rna ba la sogs pa'i dbang po lnga yid kyis byin gyis brlabs pas yongs su gzung ba'i yul sgra la sogs pa dag la blos zhen par byed la, de nas blos zhen par byas pa'i don la skyes bus sems par byed do", "english": "The ear and the rest of the five powers, inspired by the mental sense power, cause the mind to yearn towards sound and the rest: the objects that they hold. And then the soul turns its thoughts towards the objects that the mind has been yearning for."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:30477", "course": "ILL", "seq": 3158, "wylie": "mu stegs kyis btags pa ltar gyi bdag de rig pa min pa ste de'i rnam par mi 'dzin pa'ang mngon par zhen pa'i khyad par las bdag dang bdag gi zhes bdag tu lta bar 'gyur ba'i phyir ro", "english": "Which is to say, that self as it is imagined by the River Schools is not something which could ever make sense. And that's because, if it could, then that would mean that even if then we didn't perceive any aspect of it, we could view something as the self—as being “self” or “something of the self”—simply by virtue of a strong wrong belief about it."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:30602", "course": "ILL", "seq": 3283, "wylie": "de ltar nye bar len pa po rang bzhin gyis grub pa ma dmigs na, bdag de'i nye bar blang bar bya ba phung po yang rang bzhin gyis yod pa ma yin no, zhes gzugs sogs la yang bden par zhen pa'i 'dod chags dang bral ba 'thad pa nyid do", "english": "And so what we have here is the statement, “Suppose then that the one who does take these things on could not be someone who existed through some nature of their own. We would have to say in that case that what they did take on—the parts to the person—could never be entities that existed through some nature of their own either.” In that case then it would be perfectly appropriate to say that we were free from the desire which is so hungry to believe that form and the rest are real."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:30732", "course": "ILL", "seq": 3413, "wylie": "de'i phyir phung po rnams ma gtogs par gzhan du bdag tu zhen pa'i gzhi lnga pa mu stegs ma gtogs pa la mi 'byung bas, cha lnga pa ma gsungs so", "english": "As such, if we exclude the heaps, there is no other, fifth basis which one believes strongly is the self—that is, unless we include here the viewpoints of the River Schools. This then is why no fifth part was described."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:31764", "course": "ILL", "seq": 4445, "wylie": "gang gi phyir na de kho na nyid kyi don la mi mkhas pas dngos po la bden par mngon par zhen pa'i blo can las 'bras la yid ches pas lha dang mir skye ba yod par lta ba rnams kyis ni", "english": "And what is the reason for this? It is all because those who are not well versed in the meaning of suchness still possess a state of mind where they have a strong craving for taking entities as existing in truth. Because of this, they put their faith in the laws of karma and its consequences, and thus believe that rebirths as a worldly god or human do exist."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:31812", "course": "ILL", "seq": 4493, "wylie": "mi phrogs pa'i mkhyen rab dang thugs rje mnga' ba, ,ri mor bris pa'i ba drus las 'o ma bzhos pas bden par zhen pa bzlog par mdzad pas sbyar ba rdzogs so", "english": "He held a high level of knowledge that was never stolen away; and he possessed compassion as well. He was known for sketching a cow that was about to give birth, and then milking real milk from it. With this, he was able to stop others from believing that things are real. This then is the one who completed this composition."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:31816", "course": "ILL", "seq": 4497, "wylie": "ri mor bris pa'i ba drus ma la 'o ma bzhos pas sems can gyi bden par zhen pa zlog par mdzad pas", "english": "He was known as well for one day sitting down and sketching a cow that was about to give birth; and then milking that cow and coming out with real milk. With this, he was able to stop the habit that others around him had, for believing that things are real."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:34982", "course": "P9", "seq": 24, "wylie": "dag sa la gnas pa'i byang sems rnams kyi rjes thob kyi ngor chos rnams bden grub, tu snang ba yod kyang zhen pa med de gnas lugs mngon sum du rtogs pa'i slob pa 'phags pa rnams la gzugs sogs kyi chos rnams la bden grub kyi snang zhen gnyis ka med pa'i phyir", "english": "Consider now bodhisattvas who have reached one of the pure levels. Even though objects appear to their minds, during what we call the \"subsequent period,\" as something which exists truly, they have no belief in them this way. And this is because neither situation applies to realized beings who are not yet Buddhas and whoare perceiving the real nature of things directly; that is, physical matter and other objects do not appear to them as if they existed truly, and they do not believe that these objects exist that way."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32293", "course": "SPF", "seq": 67, "wylie": "ci nas kyang rang bzhin kyis grub par zhen pa'i mtshan mar 'dzin pa'i 'du shes la byang chub sems dpas gnas par mi bya'o", "english": "“And bodhisattvas never stay in any kind of conception where they hold to the signs of things: where they believe in any way at all that things could exist through any nature of their own.”"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32413", "course": "SPF", "seq": 187, "wylie": "yang dag pa'i 'du shes zhes bshad pa gang yin pa de ni bden par zhen pa'i 'du shes ma mchis pa'i slad du ste, des na bden zhen med cing bden med rtogs pa'i 'du shes de la yang dag pa'i 'du shes zhes de bzhin gshegs pas gsungs so", "english": "And this is because this same “correct thinking” is something that could never exist as a kind of thinking where one believed in things as being real. This is precisely why Those Gone Thus have used the expression “thinking correctly” to describe a kind of thinking where one no longer believes in things as being real: where one rather thinks in a way where they have realized that things have no reality."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32429", "course": "SPF", "seq": 203, "wylie": "nga'o snyam pa'i bdag tu zhen pa yod na gnod sems sogs 'byung ba ni, rnam 'grel las, ,bdag yod na ni gzhan du shes, ,bdag gzhan cha la 'dzin dang sdang, ,'di dag dang ni yongs 'brel bas, ,nyes pa thams cad 'byung bar 'gyur, ,zhes bshad pa bzhin no", "english": "On this idea that—if we entertain some belief in a self where we say to ourselves, “This is me, ” we will begin as well to entertain thoughts of harming someone—the Commentary on Valid Perception states: Once there is a self, There is the idea of “other”; And then we hold tight To the “self” side And we feel dislike For the “other” side. Once we become enmeshed In these two different sides, Every other problem possible Then starts to come to us."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32608", "course": "SPF", "seq": 382, "wylie": "gal te de lta bu'i blo zhig de bzhin gshegs pa la yod na ni, de nyid de bzhin gshegs pa'i bdag dang sems can dang gang zag dang srog tu bden par 'dzin pa'i skyon du 'gyur na, de ni mi rigs te, de bzhin gshegs pa la bdag tu 'dzin cing zhen pa sogs med pa'i phyir te, des bdag tu 'dzin pa'i mngon zhen thams cad spangs pa'i phyir ro", "english": "If the One Thus Gone ever did entertain this state of mind, there would be the problem that he would be grasping to some self of the One Gone Thus, and to some living being, or to some person, or else to something that lives, of the One Gone Thus. And that would be wrong, for the fact is that the One Gone Thus doesn't have any of these thoughts—any of this grasping to a self, or to any of the rest. This is because he has given up each and every form of the belief where we grasp to some self."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32631", "course": "SPF", "seq": 405, "wylie": "mdor na, de bzhin gshegs pa la ming dang gzugs kyi skur bden par zhen pa'i bden 'dzin gyis bcings pa de dag ni, de bzhin gshegs pa'i chos kyi sku lta ba la log par zhugs pa ste, skye bo de dag gis de bzhin gshegs pa nga'i chos kyi sku stong pa nyid mi mthong ngo", "english": "Which is to say—if we were to put it briefly—let us consider those who are shackled by the tendency to look upon the One Gone Thus and believe that he exists, in some real way, within either his name or his body of form. Such persons would be living in error as far as how they were viewing the reality body. People like this can't see me—that is, cannot see the reality body, or emptiness, that belongs to “me”: to the One Gone Thus."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:32650", "course": "SPF", "seq": 424, "wylie": "des na tha snyad du bsod nams yongs su gzung ba zhes bya'o zhes gsungs te, 'di'i gzung bar mi bya'o zhes pas bsod nams kyi phung po la bden grub tu zhen pa'i rtag lta dang, yongs su gzung mod kyis zhes chad par lta ba sel lo", "english": "And this is precisely why, Lord Buddha says, that—nominally speaking—we can call it “gathering the merit in.” When the sutra says here that we are “not to gather,” it is helping us to avoid the view that things are unchanging—where we believe that the mountains of merit exist in truth. When it says that we “should, of course, gather,” then it is helping us to avoid the view that things have simply stopped. The Buddha neither comes nor goes"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:36520", "course": "SVN", "seq": 60, "wylie": "byis pa rnams kyis rten 'brel gyi ming nyid las rang bzhin dang bcas pa zhen pa'i phyir 'phags pa'i gzigs pa la bltos nas ni rten 'byung rang bzhin med par ches gsal bar khong du chud nus so zhes bstan pa'i phyir", "english": "As soon as infants only hear the word \"dependence,\" they immediately hold on to the idea that it possesses some sort of self-nature. And so we can ourselves conclude with absolute clarity that-relative to the way a realized being sees things-dependence has no nature of its own. In order to convey this thought, Master Nagarjuna gives us the next verse of the root text."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:21849", "course": "Sunlight", "seq": 103, "wylie": "ci nas kyang rang bzhin kyis grub par zhen pa'i mtshan mar 'dzin pa'i 'du shes la byang chub sems dpas gnas par mi bya'o", "english": "\"And bodhisattvas never stay in any kind of conception where they hold to the signs of things: where they believe in any way at all that things could exist through any nature of their own.\""}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:22073", "course": "Sunlight", "seq": 327, "wylie": "yang dag pa'i 'du shes zhes bshad pa gang yin pa de ni bden par zhen pa'i 'du shes ma mchis pa'i slad du ste, des na bden zhen med cing bden med rtogs pa'i 'du shes de la yang dag pa'i 'du shes zhes de bzhin gshegs pas gsungs so", "english": "And this is because this same \"correct thinking\" is something that could never exist as a kind of thinking where one believed in things as being real. This is precisely why Those Gone Thus have used the expression \"thinking correctly\" to describe a kind of thinking where one no longer believes in things as being real: where one rather thinks in a way where they have realized that things have no reality."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:22107", "course": "Sunlight", "seq": 361, "wylie": "nga'o snyam pa'i bdag tu zhen pa yod na gnod sems sogs 'byung ba ni, rnam 'grel las, ,bdag yod na ni gzhan du shes,,bdag gzhan cha la 'dzin dang sdang,,'di dag dang ni yongs 'brel bas,,nyes pa thams cad 'byung bar 'gyur, ,zhes bshad pa bzhin no", "english": "On this idea that—if we entertain some belief in a self where we say to ourselves, \"This is me, \" we will begin as well to entertain thoughts of harming someone—the Commentary on Valid Perception states: Once there is a self,There is the idea of \"other\";And then we hold tightTo the \"self\" sideAnd we feel dislikeFor the \"other\" side.Once we become enmeshedIn these two different sides,Every other problem possibleThen starts to come to us.[106]"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:22347", "course": "Sunlight", "seq": 601, "wylie": "gal te de lta bu'i blo zhig de bzhin gshegs pa la yod na ni, de nyid de bzhin gshegs pa'i bdag dang sems can dang gang zag dang srog tu bden par 'dzin pa'i skyon du 'gyur na, de ni mi rigs te, de bzhin gshegs pa la bdag tu 'dzin cing zhen pa sogs med pa'i phyir te, des bdag tu 'dzin pa'i mngon zhen thams cad spangs pa'i phyir ro,,if The oNe thuS goNe", "english": "ever did entertain this state of mind, there would be the problem that he would be grasping to some self of the One Gone Thus, and to some living being, or to some person, or else to something that lives, of the One Gone Thus. And that would be wrong, for the fact is that the One Gone Thus doesn't have any of these thoughts—any of this grasping to a self, or to any of the rest. This is because he has given up each and every form of the belief where we grasp to some self.[528]"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:22376", "course": "Sunlight", "seq": 630, "wylie": "mdor na, de bzhin gshegs pa la ming dang gzugs kyi skur bden par zhen pa'i bden 'dzin gyis bcings pa de dag ni, de bzhin gshegs pa'i chos kyi sku lta ba la log par zhugs pa ste, skye bo de dag gis de bzhin gshegs pa nga'i chos kyi sku stong pa nyid mi mthong ngo,,which iS To Say—if we", "english": "were to put it briefly—let us consider those who are shackled by the tendency to look upon the One Gone Thus and believe that he exists, in some real way, within either his name or his body of form. Such persons would be living in error as far as how they were viewing the reality body. People like this can't see me—that is, cannot see the reality body, or emptiness, that belongs to \"me\": to the One Gone Thus.[553]"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:22401", "course": "Sunlight", "seq": 655, "wylie": "des na tha snyad du bsod nams yongs su gzung ba zhes bya'o zhes gsungs te, 'di'i gzung bar mi bya'o zhes pas bsod nams kyi phung po la bden grub tu zhen pa'i rtag lta dang, yongs su gzung mod kyis zhes chad par", "english": "LTA BA SEL LO,,And this is precisely why, Lord Buddha says, that—nominally speaking—we can call it \"gathering the merit in.\" When the sutra says here that we are \"not to gather,\" it is helping us to avoid the view that things are unchanging—where we believe that the mountains of merit exist in truth. When it says that we \"should, of course, gather,\" then it is helping us to avoid the view that things have simply stopped. The Buddha neither comes nor goes"}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:9190", "course": "TCS01", "seq": 253, "wylie": "ban bun gyi 'jig rten bya ba 'di, ,aa 'thas su zhen pas sdug la bkod, ,bag chags kyis bslad pa'i rmi lam bzhin, ,nyin mtshan kun 'khrul pa'i bya bas 'das", "english": "You rush here and there in your worldly work; believe it is something worth something, but it sends you to pain. A dream you once had because of some random thoughts; a life of days and nights spent chasing a mirage."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:9222", "course": "TCS01", "seq": 285, "wylie": "nyon mongs las ngan gyi shugs kyis, ,'di nang 'dod yon la zhen pa, ,mi gtsang phung po la chags pa'i, ,gdol ba khyi phag gi rnam thar", "english": "Driven by our negative thoughts and by our past bad karma, we spent our days here chasing the objects of the senses, in love with a pile of filth. The story of our lives is the story of butchers, wild dogs, and pigs."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:11008", "course": "TCS04Initiation", "seq": 871, "wylie": "thun mong ma yin pa rlung la ngag tu gsungs pa'i dri ma rlung sngags so sor snang zhing zhen pa'i dri ma 'khrud pas na gsung rdo rje sbyong", "english": "The unique result of this initiation is that cleaned free the diamond of your words: your enlightened speech.  You are cleaned of a very special impurity relating to the statement that \"the inner winds are what you say\"; that is, you are cleaned of the tendency for your inner winds and your mantras to appear to you as things which are separate from each other--and you are cleaned of your tendency to believe it when they appear this way."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:12430", "course": "TCS06", "seq": 247, "wylie": "rang bzhin gyi bzlas pa rlung ldang 'jug gnas gsum ni dben gzhi'i ngag dang , de gsum dang yi ge gsum gyi gdangs tha dad du zhen pa ni dben rgyu'i dgag bya dang , rlung ldang 'jug gnas gsum gyi gdangs dang yi ge gsum gyi gdangs dbyer mi phyed par sbyor ba ni dben pa'i don yin pa'i phyir dang", "english": "And this is the case because the speech here which is transcendent is the natural recitation: the three steps of the rising, the entering, and the staying of the inner winds.  And what we seek to transcend--the thing we wish to stop--is our tendency to believe that these three are somehow things which are different from the song of the three syllables.  The essence of transcendence here then is where the song of the rising, the entering, and the staying of the winds is joined indivisibly with the song of the three syllables."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:15089", "course": "TCS10", "seq": 290, "wylie": "gnyis pa la gnyis, nga rgyal gyi sems 'dzin dang, rnam pa'i sems 'dzin no, dang po ni, gsal snang yang dgos la gtso bo ni nga rgyal yin te, snang bas mi 'ching zhen pas 'ching, zhes tha mal gyi zhen pas 'khor bar 'ching ba yin pas rang gi phung khams skye mched de rnal 'byor mar bsgom pa yin te", "english": "Here then is the second part from above: actually carrying out the directions.  This too has two parts.  The first is keeping your mind on identifying with Her, and the second is keeping your mind on looking like Her; here is the first.  It is true that you need to see yourself as Her, but the most important thing is to feel like Her, because--as they say--you aren't fettered by how you look, by rather by what you believe.  What this is saying is that we are fettered to circle of pain by our belief that things are normal; therefore we must practice seeing our heaps, categories, and gateways as the Angel of Diamond."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:15736", "course": "TCS11", "seq": 255, "wylie": "de ltar gsal snang sgrub pa ni tha mal gyi snang ba'i gnyen po dang, nga rgyal sgrub pa ni tha mal gyi zhen pa'i gnyen po yin pas nga rgyal la'ang slob dgos", "english": "Practicing to achieve the clarity of the vision described above serves as an antidote against things appearing as normal, everyday.  Practicing to reach the supreme level of confidence provides the antidote to believing that things are normal, just everyday.  Therefore we must train ourselves in supreme confidence as well."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:17789", "course": "TCS14", "seq": 187, "wylie": "tha mal pa'i snang ba yid ngor dag par byed nus pa yin la, sngar bshad pa'i bcos min gyi nga rgyal 'pho nus pa byung ba na, tha mal pa'i zhen pa yid ngor dag par byed nus pa yin no", "english": "At this stage we say that you have reached the capacity to purify your mind of any tendency to see things as normal.  And when you are able, as we just described, to put your mind in a place where you identify yourself with the Angel in a way that comes to you quite naturally, then you have found the ability to purify your mind of any tendency to believe that things could be normal."}
{"ref": "corpus_segments:20863", "course": "TCS17", "seq": 1001, "wylie": "mkha' 'gro ma mchog ste gtso bo nyi shu rtsa bzhis, spyod pa ste mngon mtho mchog dang dngos por zhen pa'i 'ching ba las grol ba'i 'bras bu rab tu ster bar byed do", "english": "And then the \"highest of the Angels of the Sky,\" meaning those of the 24 holy places, will practice with them, and grant them the spiritual goal of the higher realms, and of a liberation where they are freed from the chains of believing in the things around them. * * * Je Rinpoche supplies us more detail on the different physical configurations of a partner in The Golden Harvest of Attainments: An Explication of the Stage of Completion for the Secret Teaching of Highest Bliss (Sanvara), according to the System of the Lord of Secret Practitioners, Luhipa (ACIP digital text S05325, ff. 25a-25b):"}
