
Illumination
of the True Thought

Tsongkapa’s Masterpiece on Emptiness



translated by
Geshe Michael Roach






Copyright ©2026 by Geshe Michael Roach.  All rights reserved.

Sections may be reproduced with the author’s permission.
Please contact:
geshemichael@gmail.com


Volume 101 of the Diamond Cutter Classics Series


Diamond Cutter Press
6490 Arizona Route 179A
Sedona, AZ 86351
USA




Table of Contents

Dedication	

Preface	

          The wisdom lineage in this world	

          A trip to the Tower	

          Organizing the experience:
                    the four arya truths, and the 16 aspects	

          The 16 moments	

          The logic of the four	

          The “truth” is the thing itself	

          The logic of the 16	

          Our relationship to the four	

          The 16 are spread out	

          The seven groups	

                    Group One
                    Past life influences	

                              The five baby tigers	

                              Dancing in the church	

                              All Saints	

                              Singing	

                              Books	

                              First Buddhism	

                              The Garden	

                              Assigning an aspect	

                    Group Two
                    Preparing for the diamond world

                              In and out of meditation	

                              Connection to the five paths	

                              First path: accumulation, of sadness	

                              A different kind of emptiness	

                              Second path: preparing to see	

                              Chi-jedrak: quality & characteristic	

                              Deep meditation: the room at the top	

                              My delivery to Khen Rinpoche	

                              From the top of the ladder	

                    Group Three
                    The pot on the stove	

                              Momos and frozen macaroni	

                              Luminous images	

                              Functionality	

                              Mental seeds	

                              Details of the second path	

                              A note on words and a middle way	

                              Assigning moments to the pot on the stove	

                    Group Four
                    Touching the diamond	

                              The emptiness of things, and me	

                              Assigning moments to the direct experience	

                              Diamonds: the perfect metaphor	

                    Group Five
                    The immediate aftermath	

                              A real prostration	

                              Walking the planets	       

                              The books are true, and must be saved	

                              Seven lifetimes to go	

                              We will all lay down	

                              We have never done an act
                                        that was without self-interest	

                    Group Six
                    Staying close to diamonds	

                              Suffering worse than physical	

                              Get a job!	

                              Meeting Ofer	

                              Andin International Diamond Jewelry	

                    Group Seven
                    Passing it on, and the next 500 years	

                              Real diamond cutting	

                              The Diamond Cutter:
                                        The Buddha on Managing
                                        Your Business and Your Life	

                              Sea change	

                              Continuing education	

                              Living with the world	

                              Babysitting a planet	

          A summary of the 16 aspects, or moments	

          A course of study & practice	


Illumination of the True Thought	

     Chapter 1
     Perfect Happiness	
	
          The offering of praise, and a pledge to compose the work	
	
          The meaning of the title of the book: “Entering the Middle Way”	
		
          The translators bow down	

          Singing the praises of great compassion	

          How listeners & self-made buddhas 
                    are born from Enlightened Beings	

          What is a “medium Buddha”? 	

          How Buddhas take their holy birth from bodhisattvas	

          The causes of a bodhisattva	
	
          Why compassion is the root of the roots	

          Compassion which focuses on living beings	

          Compassion which focuses upon things,
                    and upon the way in which beings are not even there	

          The purpose & the connection	

          A general discussion of how we practice this path	

          Practicing the levels for common beings	

          A combined presentation of the ten levels	
	
          A brief presentation of Perfect Happiness	

          The high qualities where our being is made beautiful	

         The name we earn	

          You belong now to a royal family,
                    and you are free of the three bonds	

          Happiness supreme	

          Working our way up	

          A realized being of the eighth rank	

          Outshining others by virtue of our family	

          Outshining others by virtue of our state of mind	

          The thinking of the autocommentary on these subjects	

          How this is the position of 
                    the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life	

          Sutras of the greater way which prove the same point	

          Classical commentaries and sutras of the lower way
                    which prove the same point	

          Refuting arguments covered in the autocommentary	

          Refuting arguments not covered in the autocommentary	

          How a person practices giving at the first bodhisattva level	

          How people of a lower type of being practice giving	

          Why did the Buddha teach giving first? 	

          How we can meet realized beings	

          Happiness comes from giving	

          Why giving is the most important	

          The high happiness of a bodhisattva	

          Does a bodhisattva feel pain, 
                  when they give away their own flesh? 	

          The different kinds of the perfection of giving	

          The moonstone	


     Chapter 2
     Immaculate	

          How, at this level, ones ethical life is completely pure	

          Our ethical life is excellent	

          Our good qualities are totally pure	

          Our life is even more ethical	

          Additional causes of purity	

          An ethical life makes us pure	

          Enjoying the fruits of giving in the world beyond	

          Keeping it going	

          Freedom from the lower realms is impossible	

          Why ethics are discussed after giving	

          A song to the ethical life	

          We cannot coexist	

          Two kinds of ethics	

          Harvest moon	


Chapter 3
Shining	

          The fire of wisdom	

          High qualities of the third	

          Patience to a higher degree	

          How others practice patience	

          Why anger is wrong	

          The uselessness of anger	

          Wishes for revenge & to avoid pain are contradictory	

          Destroying our store of good karma	

          How anger destroys good deeds	

          Stopping anger by considering the problems it causes	

          The good that comes from patience	

          Advice to be patient	

          The two kinds of patience	

          Other pure qualities of Shining	

          To win a Buddha’s body	

          The cutting light of the sun	


Chapter 4
Radiance	

          The blaze of joy	

          The qualities of enlightenment 	

          Things are not themselves	


Chapter 5
Invincible	

          Invincible over the demons	

          An excellent mind	


Chapter 6
Direct Perception	

          About the name “Direct Perception” 	

          A praise of the perfection of wisdom	

          A promise to explain the profound	

          Who is a worthy vessel for the profound	

          The good that comes from emptiness	

          Listen, and teach, well	

          How pure reality is presented in scripture	

          Things that work against an understanding of suchness	

          How we hold on to things as being real,
                    according to the Independent group	

          The Independent group on real existence, and holding to it	

          The magic show	

          The point of the metaphor	

          The position of the Consequence group	

          Things are creations of thoughts	

          What it is to hold things as real	

          Confirming the scriptures, through reasoning	

          Using reasoning to prove that things have no self-nature	

          All four ways of growing are impossible	

          Nothing starts through any nature of its own	

          Four denials of the Realized One	

          Nothing grows in either reality	

          Nothing grows from itself	

          Chandrakirti’s logic against
                    things growing from themselves	

          Denying ideas of those who think
                     they perceive some actual nature	

          Denying causes that are results	

          The pointlessness of self-existence	

          Things grown need not grow again	

          Things would grow themselves forever	

          A thing cannot act to destroy itself	

          Seed & sprout all the same	

          Not stages of a single thing	

          Held or not held, together	

          Cause & effect in the everyday world	

          Nothing but a fanciful idea	

          Avoiding problems well spoken	

          The only option left? 	

          Denying schools that say things can grow from themselves	

          The absurdity of a thing growing
                    from something other than itself	

          The source of this absurdity	
          
          Demonstrating absurdity is not 
                    automatically to accept its opposite	

          A response to absurdity	

          Entirely other, with none of four qualities	

          A more particular denial of otherness	

          The mistaken metaphor of the arms of a scale	

          How there is no simultaneity	

          Simultaneous others could never grow	

          None of four possibilities	

          What the world sees is proof	

          Contradicting what the world says—or not	

          The two natures of every existing thing	

          Other presentations of the two realities	

          Deception within deception	

          Views inspired by sleep	

          The blind do not disprove the seeing	

          Seeing deceptive reality is real	

          A unique presentation on the negative emotions	

          Deception makes its appearance	

          Ultimate reality, to a common being	

          Not, in fact, indescribable	

          The ultimate reality of the Buddhas	

          Knowing by failing to see	

          How Buddhas know the deceptive	

          The world is wrong	

          The world contradicts the world	

          Overcoming objections about what
                    the everyday world believes	

          Things growing from other, in the everyday world	

          A seeing emptiness that destroyed things	

          Normal reality cannot stand up under true analysis	

          A tiny bit, on the point	

          Illusions in the world	

          Easily escaping extremes	

          How does karma connect to a consequence?	

          The root text on how karma connects to a consequence	

          A reason not to accept foundation consciousness	

          Sesame & petals: deep seed storage	

          Karma in a dream	

          Overthinking karma	

          An intent of self-correction	

          On foundation consciousness, or not	

          Just like me & mine	

          Mind Only on the sixth level	

          Denying the dream	

          The failure of the dream	

          Using dreams for the deceptive	

          No strand of hair	

          Denying others on deep seeds	

          The present has no potential on its own	

          Denying a self-existent potential for the future	

          Denying a past on its own	

          The Mind Only on outer objects	

          Denying Mind Only objects	

          Scripture can deny Mind Only	

          No contradiction with the repulsive	

          A summary of the denial	

          An attempted proof of the dominated	

          A response on the dominated	

          Assumptions from recollection	

          Recollection according to the autocommentary	

          Recollection according to other classics	

          Rejecting rebuttal about direct accurate perception	

          Rejecting rebuttal about deductive accurate perception	

          Rejecting rebuttal on another consciousness	

          Other proofs of illogic	

          Things the same as no one	

          Failure of the Mind Only	

          Following the Arya	

          Denying the dominated is not to deny the world	

          “Only” is not meant to deny outer objects	

          How other sutras make the same point	

          “Only” means “primary”	

          Outer & inner are equivalent	

          “Mind only” in A Journey to Langka	

          Other sutras on “mind only” are also figurative	

          Figurative by logic	

          Distinguishing the figurative from the literal	

          Denying things from themselves & other	

          And never with no cause	

          Where the four take us	

          Refuting debate about the denial	

          A summary of the refutation	

          Dependence stops the mistake	

          Fruits from the examination	

          Freedom requires understanding the self	

          The system of the Numerists	

          The system of the Detailers	

          Disproving others on the self	

          Other groups on parts being a self	

          Denying others on the parts	

          Refuting answers on the parts	

          Support for denying that the parts constitute the self	

          Other problems with parts as the self	

          Sutra on what we deny	

          Sutra never said the parts were the self	

          Additional argument on these points	

          Other sutras on simple collections	

          Denying the outline as the self	

          Other problems with parts as a self	

          The self as the six elements	

          The irrelevance of others’ position	

          Denying that the basis and what relies on it are involved	

          How destruction is mistaken	

          Others on the substantial person	

          Disproving the substantial person	

          The seven extremes	

          Denying the collection is the wagon	

          Denying that the outline is the wagon	

          Applying the same logic	

          Rejecting arguments against the explanation	

          Another interpretation of names	

          The actual points about eliminating extremes	

          Refuting argument on eliminating extremes	

          The wagon & the self	

          Further advantages to a dependent self	

          Self: foundation for bondage & liberation	

          Denying any nature to what belongs to the self	

          How the examination follows for common entities	

          How the examination follows for cause & effect	

          An argument that the problems are just the same	

          How we accept, nominally, the attack	

          How we accept the proof of our own position	

          Why our position is not equivalent	

          Beyond any denial	

          Additional attacks	

          Divisions of emptiness in brief	

          The sixteen, beginning with emptiness on the inside	

                    1) Emptiness on the inside	

                              How we do accept a nature	

          Three more kinds of emptiness	

                    2) Emptiness on the outside	

                    3) Emptiness on the outside and the inside	

                    4) Emptiness emptiness	

          The four starting with great emptiness	

                    5) Great emptiness	

                    6) Ultimate emptiness	

                    7) The emptiness of produced things	

                    8) The emptiness of things that exist but were not produced	

          The four starting with emptiness beyond all extremes	

                    9) The emptiness beyond all extremes	

                    10) The emptiness of no beginning or end	

                    11) The emptiness that can never be given up	

                    12) The emptiness of any nature	

          The emptiness of all things	

                    13) The emptiness of all things	

          The emptiness of its own quality, in brief	

                    14) The emptiness of its own quality	

                              Emptiness of own quality related to the original condition	

                              Emptiness of own quality related to the time of the path	

                              Emptiness of own quality related to the time of the result	

                              A summary on emptiness of its own quality	

          Emptiness of not seeing, and true nature	

                    15) The emptiness of not seeing anything	

                    16) The emptiness of true nature, beyond all things	

          The division of emptiness into four	

          A concluding summary describing the high qualities	
          

     Chapter 7
     The Final Four Levels	

          The seventh level	

          Special prayers, and rising from cessation	

          Finishing off negative emotions	

          The ten powers of the eighth	

          The ninth level	

          The tenth level	

          High qualities of the first level	

          High qualities of levels two through seven	

          High qualities of the three pure levels	

          How we first reach enlightenment	

          An argument against how we reach enlightenment	

          Refuting the idea that realizing suchness is mistaken	

          How Buddhas know all things, and the way of all things	

          The actual point on gaining knowledge	

          The one who gains knowledge	

          The holy body of all things	

          The holy body complete in enjoyments	

          Everything from a single pore	

          Other displays from the pores	

          Carrying out their wishes	

          The ten forces, in brief	

          The five beginning with knowing the actual	

                    1) The force of knowing what is actual, and what is not	

                    2) The force of knowing how different karmas will open	

                    3) The force of knowing the variety of wishes	

                    4) The force of knowing people’s different propensities	

                    5) The force of knowing higher or lesser capacities	

          The five beginning with knowing the paths	

                    6) The force of understanding the paths
                              that lead to different goals	

                    7) The force of understanding concentration & the like	

                    8) The force of understanding days gone by	

                    9) The force of the knowledge of
                              the deaths and such of beings	

                    10) The force of knowing that
                              the last of impurities is finished	

          The impossibility of describing all the fine qualities	

          Benefits of understanding the qualities	

          The holy body of emanation	

          All a single path	

          The point of enlightenment	

          Residing in total enlightenment	


How the commentary was composed	

A dedication of the good deed	

The master who composed the work	

The translators who created the Tibetan version	

How Je Tsongkapa composed his commentary	


The Root Text of
Entering the Middle Way	


Je Tsongkapa’s
Outline of the Text	


Appendices	

          About the translator	

          Acknowledgements	

          Bibliography of works originally written in Sanskrit	

          Bibliography of works originally written in Tibetan	

          Bibliography of works written in English	


The Diamond Cutter Classics Series	




Dedication

This work is dedicated of course
to my divine Angel,
Veronica,

and to fulfil the promise
I made to every living being
in the universe.

The original translation was completed
on the auspicious
Je Tsongkapa’s Day,
December 25, 2024,
which was also the
Western celebration of Christmas.






Preface

The wisdom lineage in this world

In the 25-year course for a geshe, or master of Buddhism, in the ancient Tibetan tradition, the study of emptiness according to the highest school of all comes only after twelve years of dedicated study and public debating.

The study is based of course upon the great ancient teachings on emptiness granted by Lord Buddha in such works as the Diamond Cutter Sutra, and the Heart Sutra.  The concept though is so difficult and easily misunderstood that the fledgling geshe quickly pivots to the classic shastras or medieval commentaries upon the topic.

The earliest one of these, considered the greatest of the great, is the poetic presentation of Arya Nagarjuna entitled Wisdom, in 27 succinct chapters.  This was written around 200ad; and then some four centuries later, an extraordinary explanation of the content of Wisdom was written by the brilliant Master Chandrakirti, who entitled his work Entering the Middle Way.

Over the next 800 years, dozens of Sanskrit classics were composed in Asia to clarify these two works.  Then came the present volume, entitled The Illumination of the True Thought, composed by the incomparable Tibetan savant Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419).

As you can see, the English translation of this work comprises some two thousand pages.  Je Tsongkapa leaves no philosophical stone unturned, and pushes us to confront every possible angle in his investigation.  In a way, it takes some amount of courage and intellectual endurance to glean his ideas in their entirety.

Faced—after more than a decade of labor—with the task of composing this preface to the finally finished translation, I began to collect notes for a sort of standard scholarly survey of the contents of this great classic.


A trip to the Tower

In the midst of this process, I was asked to deliver a series of lectures to an audience of about a thousand people in Xi’an, the ancient capital of the golden era of China: the Tang Dynasty.  This dynasty is dated 618-907ad, and even in its early years the population of the capital (known in those days as Chang’an) was about a hundred times larger than London of the same period.

The topic of my presentation was to be an exploration of what in the classics is known as the “path of seeing,” or a person’s first direct contact with ultimate reality: emptiness.  During these talks, I had the honor of visiting the Great Wild Goose Pagoda (seen here), where around 650ad the great master Xuanzang (602-664ad) began his massive labor of translating a great number of the 650 Buddhist classics he had collected during his 17-year journey to the many kingdoms of India and its environs.

Influenced I feel by this inspiration, I made a decision not to deliver a scholarly presentation upon emptiness, but rather to recount the details of my own direct experience of it.

This event happened on July 28, 1975, when I was 22 years old.  The direct perception of emptiness by an individual on this planet, since the time of Lord Buddha, has occurred perhaps only once in every few hundred years.  When I did see it, I instinctively felt that I should not share the experience with anyone—perhaps because the karma of not believing a person who has had the direct perception of emptiness is so extremely serious; and, after all, a person who has not had the experience themselves would find it very difficult, if not impossible, to confirm the truth of my claim.

I am now 73 years of age, and suffer from stage four kidney disease, which may well require a kidney transplant.  It is possible that I don’t have a great deal of time left in this world.  When I stood up to speak to the audience in Xi’an last week, I made a personal decision that I would try to share in careful detail my direct experience of emptiness, to inspire those who know me and would trust my description; and also to leave a record as complete as I could, of what a person can expect with this direct experience—plus my very best tips that would help a normal person reach it.

It is my personal belief that if any normal person devotes some serious time to studying the authentic classics on the topic of emptiness—such as the present translation—and also follows carefully the suggestions I make here, then they have a good chance of reaching this very rare goal within this one brief lifetime.



Organizing the experience:
the four arya truths, and the 16 aspects

The Buddha taught in this world for over four decades after his enlightenment; and the very first teaching he ever gave was in fact a description of how to see emptiness directly, by using what we call the “four arya truths” or “four higher truths.”  Someone who has been through the actual experience of seeing emptiness directly can say—from personal experience—that these four are a perfect framework for describing the experience, and helping others to reach it.

First of all we should say something about the name here: the “four arya truths.”  This is a translation of the original Sanskrit phrase, chatur arya satyani (technical spelling catur ārya satyāni).  Chatur here means four, and we see it in certain English words derived from the Sanskrit, such as quart.

Arya literally means elevated, since when we do manage to see emptiness directly we step up to a higher level of evolution—just about the mental difference between a prehistoric amoeba and Albert Einstein.  In the ancient literature, a person who has managed to reach the direct perception of emptiness is themselves referred to as an arya, or a “higher” form of life.

Satyani is the plural for the word “truth,” or “reality.”  It’s ultimately related to the English word is.

During the early years when the Buddhist classics were first being translated into English, this expression was mis-translated as “four noble truths,” and unfortunately that phrase has stuck.  Referring to the four rather as “arya” truths or “higher” truths is crucial, since it is this higher reality which frees us from all pain and death in this life.
	
It’s important to specify what makes a person “higher” once they have seen emptiness directly.  To really appreciate this, we need to recognize two facts about our life that are undeniable, but which we tend to hide from.

First of all, the fundamental nature of our normal human life is pain.  We may be born into an affluent country; we may be born into a poor country.  In the latter case, we suffer throughout our life from trouble like insufficient food and housing.  But even in the former case, we live through our short, alloted span of years and gradually—inevitably—become old and decrepit, finally dying and losing all and everyone dear to us.  It’s simply hopeless stubbornness to insist that this is not the way all normal life must go.

When we touch emptiness—when we become an arya—this process begins to reverse itself.  It’s as if a single cell of cancer has insinuated itself into the very core of our body, and now it will spread and ruin our entire life.  Except that—in the case of an arya—we can say that seeing emptiness directly inserts a single cell of eternal diamond life into the center of us: a cell that will and must spread until we finally transform into deathless creatures of eternal joy (along with all our loved ones).

And so suffering is the first undeniable truth about our life, and death is the second.  That death with the loss of everything and everyone dear to us, including our own self.  But the truth of death includes a second half to it that only a fool would deny.

When you throw a pair of dice, there are only so many numbers that can come up.  Each of the faces of the dice represents a different number, from 1 to 6.  And so there are only 11 different combinations that can ever come up from throwing two such dice down at the same time: the total numbers 2 to 12.

There is a 1 in 11 chance that any particular number will come up: if you throw the dice a hundred times, then on average for example the number 12 will come up nine times: 9% of the time.  Barring anything completely weird, there is no chance that you will never get a 12, especially if you throw the dice a billion or a trillion times.  You get the picture.

The undeniable truth then is that if we have been born into life once, we can be born into life a second time, or a billionth time.  You can say that you don’t believe this—you can say that your people or your country doesn’t believe this—but then you are just being stubborn, or prejudiced.  Just rationally—just with regard to raw truth—it’s impossible that coming into a life like this and going through it and then crashing down into hopeless pain & death can’t repeat itself.

We came here once, so we have to come here again.  Only an arya can stop this process, and re-direct it to an eternal life of total joy, along with all our loved ones.

We need to touch emptiness.


The 16 moments

Traditionally, over the last 25 centuries of the wisdom tradition in the Eastern part of our world, these four facts of life—the Four Higher Truths—have been divided into 16 different aspects: four for each truth.

These sixteen divisions of course give us a deeper understanding of the four truths that they relate to.  Over the millennia, the divisions have been referred to with different names.

One such name, in the Tibetan, is nampa (technical spelling rnam-pa).  The connotation here is of 16 “types” or “aspects.”  We also see, in this context, kechikma (spelt skad-cig-ma), which means “instant in time.”  There is, thus, one tradition that the direct perception of emptiness passes in 15 or 16 milliseconds of time, and that during each millisecond we perceive—directly—another aspect or feature of the four truths.

There is a third tradition—found for example in the sutra by Lord Buddha himself entitled Awarenesses of Pure Reality (Saddharma Smirtyupasthana) which refers to the sixteen as “examinations” of reality.

During my own direct perception of emptiness—some 50 years before this writing—I passed through a number of distinct, separate, extraordinary and direct understandings immediately after the direct contact with emptiness itself.  Each understanding had a distinct beginning and end, rising and subsiding like a separate ocean wave at the seashore.

In the hours after direct contact with emptiness, these understandings took on average a few minutes of time.  Thus I would follow the higher schools of historical Buddhism on this point, and would not describe these understandings as something that came and went in a single millisecond each.

Rather, I would refer to them as “moments of understanding” rather than “aspects” or “milliseconds”; in the sense that a “moment” of warmth with a loved one may pass in a minute or so, or continue on even to an hour, albeit unmarked.


The logic of the four

Traditionally, in Buddhist scripture, the Four Truths are listed in two different orders.  

The more common order is in fact succinctly described by the author of our Illumination of the True Thought, which you should understand is the greatest and most thorough presentation on emptiness ever written in history.  It incorporates the few mightiest descriptions of emptiness ever written on this planet to date—ranging from the Heart Sutra (Lord Buddha, 500bc); to the Wisdom of Arya Nagarjuna (c. 200ad); to Master Chandrakirti’s present Entering the Middle Way (c. 625ad); to the incomparable Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (Master Shantideva, c. 750ad).

The incomparable Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419) then gives one version of the order of the Four Truths as follows:

Now why are the higher truths described as exactly four in number?  The components to be taken up or left off of by those of understanding always belong to one of two categories: the dark side, or the side of light.  And each of these two has two further divisions: cause, and effect.

That is, the first truth is a result from the dark side of life: the arya truth of suffering.  The second truth is its cause, also on the dark side: what we call the arya truth of the source of suffering.

The third truth then is where we want to go: the arya truth of the end of suffering.  And then the fourth arya truth is the path to that stopping of pain.

Sometimes, to get a deeper appreciation, the four truths are listed cause-effect/cause-effect.  Then we get the causes of pain; the fact of pain; the causes of freedom; and finally freedom itself.


The “truth” is the thing itself

It’s very important by the way to appreciate the four truths are not statements of fact: the first truth for example is not the concept or statement that “life is suffering.”

Rather, each of the truths is meant to be taken as the direct experience of it: when we cut our finger in the kitchen, that pain itself is the arya “truth” or reality of suffering.  When we pause in the process of getting upset at someone who has just said something unkind to us—because we understand that they are actually proceeding from seeds in our mind, planted there when we ourselves were unkind to someone else at some earlier—that pause itself is the arya truth of the end of pain.


The logic of the 16

The logic behind the order of the four moments inside of each of the four truths is not so clear.  To start with, there is even a question of whether there are four, or three, moments inside each one.

That is, the name of each one of the four higher truths is repeated inside the four moments contained by each—so that it seems that the moments or aspects of the four might even total no more than 12, and not 16.

To get an appreciation of this problem, let’s list the 16 in their traditional order.  That same sutra by Lord Buddha himself, Awarenesses of Pure Reality, is a typical source:

	A. Moments of the truth of suffering
		[1] Impermanence
		[2] Suffering*
		[3] Emptiness
		[4] No self-nature

	B. Moments of the truth of the source of suffering
		[5] Source*
		[6] Cause
		[7] Spring
		[8] Factor

	C. Moments of the truth of the end of suffering
		[9] End*
		[10] Peace
		[11] Beauty
		[12] Escape

	D. Moments of the truth of the path to the end of suffering
		[13] Path*
		[14] Logic
		[15] Means
		[16] Method

Already we can see that where the general name of the truth is repeated as one of each one’s four aspects or moments (which we’ve marked here with an asterisk), it’s not necessarily even the first of the four listed—which is really confusing if they are meant to re-indicate the name of the group.

There is one traditional source which advocates for taking them this way, and that is A Massive Commentary to the Sutra entitled “Obliterating the Galaxy,” written in medieval India by a master named Karmavajra (a back-translation of the Tibetan, Las kyi rdo-rje).  We do though see a number of older sources, including our Awarenesses of Pure Reality, which seems to treat the four moments as equally-weighted sub-categories for each of the four truths.

Here is how that sutra Awarenesses of Pure Reality describes the difference between the 16 moments:

		[1] Impermanence,
			because it involves causes and factors
			that make it happen

		[2] Suffering,
			because it it really hurts

		[3] Emptiness,
			because it is devoid of any individual

		[4] No self-nature,
			because it is devoid of any engaging
			of its own accord

		[5] Source,
			because it engages through factors

		[6] Cause,
			because it matches its result

		[7] Spring,
			because it works through all kinds
			of instigations

		[8] Factor,
			because of its absolute accordance
			with its results

		[9] End,
			because of the total elimination
			of the negative emotions			

		[10] Peace,
			because we have absolutely
			extinguished the fire of
			everything involved with 
			negative emotions

		[11] Beauty,
			because it is the single most 
			important thing in the world

		[12] Escape,
			because it is leaving the 
			cycle of pain forever

		[13] Path,
			because it is the one thing
			that allows us to achieve
			enlightenment and freedom
			
		[14] Logic,
			because it is completely
			beyond any error

		[15] Means,
			because all higher beings
			reside in it, always

		[16] Method,
			because it puts an absolute end
			to everything involved with
			negative emotions, here in the
			cycle of pain.

It’s important to note that there is no more detailed or specific description of those 16 parts of the four higher truths—in all 25 centuries of Buddhist scripture from the time of the Buddha up to the present day—than we see here.

Since the Sanskrit language is the foundation for the English language, some of our readers may benefit from the Sanskrit equivalents of the names of the 16 moments.  Here they are, along with the Tibetan counterpart—important since there are so many relevant Tibetan classics from the past 600 years or so.  The pronunciation here of both is simplified to the closest English sounds.

	A. Moments of the truth of suffering (duhkha, duk-ngel)
		[1] Impermanence (anitya, mitakpa)
		[2] Suffering (duhkha, duk-ngel)
		[3] Emptiness (shunya, tongpa)
		[4] No self-nature (anatma, dakmey)

	B. Moments of the truth of the source of suffering (samudaya, kunjung)
		[5] Source (samudaya, kunjung)
		[6] Cause (hetu, gyu)
		[7] Spring (prabhava, rab tu kyewa)
		[8] Factor (pratyaya, kyen)

	C. Moments of the truth of the end of suffering (nirodha, gokpa)
		[9] End (nirodha, gokpa)
		[10] Peace (shanta, shiwa)
		[11] Beauty (pranita, gyanompa)
		[12] Escape (nihsarana, ngepar jungwa)

	D. Moments of the truth of the path to the end of suffering (marga, lam)
		[13] Path (marga, lam)
		[14] Logic (nyaya, rikpa)
		[15] Means (pratipatti, druppa)
		[16] Method (nairyanika, ngepar jinpa)


Our relationship to the four

A famous topic from the great books is: What should our relationship to each of these four higher truths be?  The classic answer to this question is found in The Higher Line, a famed work by the future Buddha, Maitreya, dictating to the great Arya Asanga around 350ad:

An illness is something that you should come to realize that you have.  The cause of the illness is something you should rid yourself of.  Happy health then is what we need to attain; and the medicine to reach it is something we need to employ.

Just so, the truth of suffering is what we should come to realize that we have.  The truth of the cause of this suffering is what we should rid ourselves of.  The truth of the end of suffering is something we need to meet up with; and the truth of the path to this end is what we need to employ.

Seeing emptiness directly is the single method that helps us reach these proper relationships to the four truths.  And when we reach this proper relationship, then we are free of all present and future pain.  The matchless Arya Nagarjuna says it this way, in his String of Jewels, the second letter to the King:

	If we are truly able
	To acquaint ourselves
	With the sixteen aspects—

	With the impermanence
	And so forth which are
	The point of the four truths—

	Then we are able
	To eliminate all of our
	Negative emotions,

	Along with all the
	Deep seeds for these.

	Clouds in the sky disappear;
	Ice on the lake melts away;
	The candle dies out—

	And just so our mind
	Is completely freed.

Although our ideal relationship to the four truths in general is therefore quite clear, what we realize by this point in our conversation is that in the entire recorded history of Buddhism we never get a description of just what the 16 divisions of these truths would look like, in a real life.  And that means that we never really learn what’s supposed to happen during the direct perception of emptiness, which is universally described as the most important moment in the entire life of a Buddhist.

So what I propose to do here next is to draw a correlation between each of the famous 16 moments relating to the direct perception of emptiness, and my own unique experiences during that time.  In the five decades since that event, I cannot say that I have personally met another person who has seen emptiness directly—although of course they may be living somewhere in the world where I wouldn’t have had contact with them.  I can say though that if there were another such person alive today, they would be engaged in many of the same activities as I have been; for example in the diamond trade, or the preservation & translation of the classics of Buddhism.

Which is to say, it may very well be the case that in this world there is no one else alive to draw the connections I will propose in the following.  Perhaps, in time, there will come someone who could do it more accurately; but until then it is certainly crucial, I believe, that I give it my best try.  At the very least, these thoughts will help plant the necessary seeds within my readers that would help them see emptiness directly themselves.


The 16 are spread out

One idea that has become clear to me in the decades since I “touched the diamond world” is that the 16 moments in real life are not neatly organized under the four truths in the way that scripture would suggest.  We see in the surviving original teachings of Lord Buddha (where there are over 600 references to the four truths) that even the idea of four moments for each of the four truths may simply have been promoted for convenience, for symmetry: there are earlier references for example to more than four, with some of the truths.

This implies that actually drawing a correlation between the theory and the actual experience may not be as neat as we would expect; and this is indeed my personal experience.  Which is to say, in real time we may have to “jump around” to find all 16 of the actual experiences with an individual who has actually had them.

One of the first things we realize, with the actual experience, is that although many of the 16 actual experiences do indeed occur in the aftermath of the direct perception of emptiness, it is not the case that all of them do.  I personally believe that an “active” count of the 16, in my case, began some six months prior to the direct perception; with even some of those moments resulting from lifetimes of previous experience.  I can add though that all of the 16 had occurred, in some form, by the end of the day on what I call “Diamond Day”—the day of my direct perception of emptiness; that day in July 1975.


The seven groups

Looking back, I can see that my own direct experience of emptiness can be organized into seven different, specific time periods; and I think that if I make my presentation using them, it will help you plant the seeds for the same experience, and in the meantime get a more accurate understanding of the 16 special moments.  Here is a list of those seven groups of experiences:

	Group 1
	Past life influences

	Group 2
	Preparing for the diamond world

	Group 3
	The pot on the stove

	Group 4
	Touching the diamond

	Group 5
	The immediate aftermath

	Group 6
	Staying close to diamonds

	Group 7
	Passing it on, and the next 500 years
	

Group One:
Past life influences


The five baby tigers

Happily, there is an all-important precedent for the idea of seeking the roots of the direct perception of emptiness—we can call them “16 roots”—in an earlier lifetime.  The story begins in a time long past, with a prince by the name of Mahasattva: Magnificent Courage.

On a day quite typical for an ancient Indian royal, Prince Mahasattva is out with friends and family walking through the forest—oftentimes a reserve of the surrounding land set aside only for the enjoyment of the extended ruling family.

Mahasattva gets separated from the rest of the party, and his steps take him into a particularly thick and dark part of the forest.  Suddenly at his feet he sees a magnificent female tiger laying exhausted, near death from a lack of food & water.  At her teats hang five tiny tiger cubs—also on the edge of death—sucking where milk can no longer come.

The prince reflects only for a few moments before he sees what he must do: he quietly lies down next to the tigress, pushing close to her the warm scent of his own body, his meat.

But the beast is too far gone even to bite, to eat.  The Prince is perturbed, but thinks of a solution.  He rises and pulls a dead branch from a nearby tree, and gouges furrows across his chest and abdomen with it, and the blood gushes forth.

He lies down again, and happily the tigress is able to lap up the blood, and regain her strength.  Soon, she can consume the flesh as well—and then milk springs forth for her five babies.

And as he slips into death, the Prince makes one final prayer: “By eating my body, and drinking my blood, may you five children and your mother become my first disciples, when I reach my own enlightenment, as a Buddha, in future times.”

And then perhaps countless lifetimes later, it does come to be that the Prince is reborn as another prince: Siddhartha, the Buddha-to-be of our own world.  As we have heard, the Prince is carefully shielded from seeing pain or suffering, but in the end he does witness aging, illness, and death; and determines to leave the royal life in pursuit of a solution.

In the company of five forest meditators, he enters a period of extreme fasting and practice, torturing his body and mind.  Eventually he comes to the realization that these extremes are not helping him; and he undertakes a middle way of simplicity with care for his health.

Siddhartha thus in time reaches his own Buddhahood, sitting in meditation below a sacred tree in a place called Vajrasana—the “Seat of the Diamond”—and later known as Bodhgaya.  It is said that for seven weeks he stayed silent about his enlightenment, in the belief that no on would be able to understand his description of it, and how to reach it themselves.

But at the end of these weeks he finally decides to give teaching a try.  He seeks out his former group of five friends, who spot him approaching across an open field.

“Ah, here comes that slacker, Siddhartha!  The one who gave up on real spiritual practice!”

“Let’s ignore him!  Let’s pretend we don’t see him coming!  And especially let’s not show him any respect!”

They all agree, except that tradition says that one of them, their leader, by the name of Kaundinya, feels unsure about the plan.  And then suddenly the Buddha—now going by the name of Gautama, or “Head Bull of the Herd”—is standing in their midst.  And suddenly too they all feel absolutely compelled to pay him honor, preparing a cushion for him to sit on, helping to fold his outer robe.

But then again they do have a name for him, which is “Junior,” and they start using it in front of him.

“No, no,” he corrects them.  “Perhaps before I was Junior, but now I am something more.”  And he relates the story of his enlightenment, and The Five believe him.

 “Please teach us then, how we may reach the goal ourselves,” they beg.

The Buddha himself—and even this name means “The One Who Knows All Things”—must decide what is the one most powerful instruction, of all the thousands of teachings he will give over the rest of his life, to offer to his first disciples.

And that teaching was the four higher truths.  He repeated it three times through, for a total of twelve ideas (not to be confused with the 16 aspects).  The Group of Five—the first five disciples—were Kaundinya; Ashvajit; Bhadrika; Vaspa; and Mahanama.  It is said that, following the first time through the teaching of the four truths, Kaundinya (perhaps due to his reservations about “Junior”) achieves the direct perception of emptiness; and afterwards he is referred to by Lord Buddha as “Kaundinya, who understands everything.”  Then, as the truths are repeated, the other four reach emptiness directly as well.

The five first disciples were, of course, the five tiger cubs from the ancient past—who with that connection had planted the seeds to see emptiness directly.  Their mother the Tigress, by the way, was reborn as Maha Prajapati.  This is the stepmother of Prince Siddhartha, who raised him after his mother died not long after his birth—and eventually became the first Buddhist nun in this world.

We can see then the powerful effect of past-life experiences on reaching the goal of touching emptiness directly.  Let’s look at some of those that laid the groundwork for my own emptiness experience.


Dancing in the church

During the day of my direct perception of emptiness in 1975, I also had direct perceptions of my future lifetimes, which I will outline below.  At the same time, I can honestly say that I have not had any direct perceptions of my past lifetimes, at any time during this life.  I do though sometimes make a list to myself of events or impressions or urges in this life that logically must have been strongly influenced by events in my past lives.

Starting from the earliest years of my life, I was strongly attracted to being inside of churches, and one of my first and strongest memories of my life took place at a chapel called St Augustine by the Sea, which at the time (about 1957, when I was 5) looked like the photo of it you see here—this structure burned down in a fire in the 1960’s, and was replaced by a very modern style building which still stands there, quite active.

I must have been in pre-school, or just starting first grade.  I remember that the parents of the kids had a close connection to the school, and would deliver homemade lunches for everybody at least once a week.  We had a kind, wonderful priest as the head of the school, and my class had an older teacher, a woman, whose name I can’t recall.

Sometimes she would lead us all into the chapel.  She has us stand sprinkled along the aisles between the lovely wooden pews, with their lovely wooden scent, offset by the fragrance of the Pacific Ocean just outside—we are in Santa Monica, a beautiful beachside part of Los Angeles.

And then she tells us to dance: “Just dance!”  Recently online I found this photo of that original chapel; and this is exactly where we danced, little children laughing in joy and swirling and running wherever we liked in the church—among the angels and crosses, with the sunlight pouring down over the altar.

In Buddhism we are encouraged to use logic and trust in it as much as we do in our own eyes & ears.  I feel as sure that I had some previous blessing to experience these things, as those tiger cubs had to meet Siddhartha—and step onto the path to see emptiness directly.  I cannot see what happened directly, only with that undeniable sense we all have, of how things come from something else before them.

There is more, and it’s fun to relate to you.  I hope it doesn’t seem tedious, or too self-indulgent.  Thank you for wanting to learn these things.

I feel it was significant that this chapel, named after the Christian saint Augustine, was located in the area of Los Angeles named Santa Monica: the Spanish for “Saint Monica,” who was Augustine’s mother.  “Los Angeles” of course means “City of the Angels,” and I always felt it was a blessing to be born in places with such names.  Every changing thing in the universe needs a cause; and I feel that seeds from my actions I took in my past life were responsible for these names—for me—in the place where I was born.  Again, think of the five tiger cubs: everything is like that, whether we ever recognize it or not.  There are no accidents.


All Saints

When I had turned 6, my family moved to Phoenix, Arizona—which at the time was quite a small city.  My father was a builder of homes, whole neighborhoods of homes, and he correctly foresaw that Phoenix would come to grow: it is now 10 times larger than when I was a boy.

I entered first grade at a public school (which in Arizona means “not private”—a place where all the working families sent their kids) called Maryland Elementary.  Again I think it is a reflection of my past life’s good seeds that this and my high school, Washington Public High School, were filled with kids of many races, all harmonious, and extremely good teachers.

My sixth-grade teacher for example—Michael Bloom (seen here in his 80’s)—coaxed us through advanced English grammar and sentence diagraming; frequent composition of essays; algebra; astronomy; practical chemistry; and some 20 years before the first Apple computer insisted that we learn binary code, with the old punch cards: “Computers are going to be a big deal in the future!”

On top of that, he was a semi-professional baseball player and football player, which made him an automatic hero in our school.  He was also a devout Jew—very rare in our community in those days—and taught me much about the world’s religions from a stunning collection of books at his home.  Sometimes in the summer our parents would let us take special, private courses from him at the school on our own time, and these were amazing.

Again, I just mention it because I must have planted powerful good seeds in my past life to meet my many very excellent teachers in this life.  I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Bloom some 60 years later, at dinner with myself and my wife Veronica, and he shared with me a worn paper record of an IQ test he had given me, that he had kept all that time.

These were the kind of dedicated teachers I grew up with; and it is my belief that even to be born in a country and a world which generally advocate for a good education for all the children in the country is itself evidence that we have all accumulated extraordinary karma in our past lifetimes.

But the most precious thing in those years was All Saints’ Church.

My mother—although not so much my dad—was very religious, in a very good way.  That is, not strongly attached to one religion over another, but a devoted believer of the religious teaching that we should serve everyone around us, all the days of our life.  Even as a mother of four boisterous boys, she found time to volunteer for example to drive the sick and elderly to their doctors’ appointments, and the grocery store.

And so even at the age of 6, I went to church every Sunday with my mother especially, and learned what it was to pray, and listen to the holy books and sermons.  I went through what in our church was called Confirmation, or the training for young people that would entitle them to partake of communion: the ritual bread and wine which represents the body and blood of Jesus Christ, the Great Sacrificer, a Prince Mahasattva that we spent time with weekly.

This was so much different from my school education—but it felt as though the two went together perfectly: school for learning to fill our worldly needs, church for learning to fill our eternal needs.

Unlike the horror stories we hear of some churches and priests, our church—All Saints’—was sort of a paradise sitting in the middle of the city of Phoenix.  The grounds were beautiful and well cared for, as was the cathedral itself.  The priests were extraordinary individuals.

Father Paul for example had been a wild trapper in the mountains of Alaska; one day he was caught in a small cabin in the wilderness, snowed under by a covering of many feet of heavy snow.  He had no way of digging out, and he sat down to die.  He made prayers that—if by some miracle, someone happened by and thought to dig him out, and save his life—he promised he would become a priest.  That’s exactly what happened, and us boys were so excited to have a man’s man teach us the mysteries of religion.

My Mom soon enlisted my older brother Geoff and I as acolytes; at the time these were the young men aged perhaps 10 to 16 who helped the priests during the church services on Sunday.  Our duties most importantly included assisting the priests in the preparation of the sacred bread and wine, and providing it to the members of the congregration in attendance.

There is a story here that I would like to share, again just in the interests of establishing the contours of my previous lifetimes, in preparation for seeing emptiness directly.  At my church there were probably several thousand members, and so on Sunday we had three different services.  At 7:15am we had Holy Communion—where everyone confirmed partakes of the body & blood of Christ; and this was the service for the die-hards, who enjoyed the more traditional liturgy or ritual reserved for this hour.

At 9:30am came the family people; especially those with children who would walk over to special classrooms nearby for religious instruction, so the parents could enjoy church in peace.  And then at 11am there were the sleepyheads of all types, who couldn’t get to church any earlier.

The preparation by the priests and acolytes took place in special, sacred side rooms that opened out to the great altar of the cathedral; and here we prepared the sacraments and helped each other into our religious robes.  Then when the grand organ burst out in its first notes, we would make our dramatic entrance up at the altar, in front of the hundreds of faithful.

Only on this particular day, at an early 7:15 service, we marched out in front of the altar and there was not a single person sitting in the church.

My older brother Geoff and I exchanged an excited glance.  Maybe we get to go home! it said.

Father Paul turned and faced us and the other priests.

“Remember,” he said quietly.  “Jesus said that—if one or two should ever gather in his name—he will be there with us.  We will go ahead with the service!”

And we did—we went carefully through the entire Communion, as if there were the usual hundreds of people sitting before us.  For my brother and I, this was a defining moment in our lives.  The priest was taking a very long time to go with care through the most sacred ceremony of a Christian, even if it was just for the three or four of us there in the clergy.  It truly was between us and Jesus, personally, and not for other people watching us.  Again, I sincerely hold that this event had a cause, and that the cause lay somewhere in my lifetimes before.

My father and many of the middle-aged men in the congregation had served in terrible bloody battles during the Second World War, which had ended only seven years before my birth.  They were rough & ready men, and organized a boy scout troop there at our church.

This was a group of about a hundred 11 to 17-year-old boys who were children of families at the church.  Our fathers, toughened by the war, took us out into the farflung forests and deserts of Arizona once a month, for three days of hiking, mountain climbing, and education in surviving in the wild.

Part of the training was that each one of us boys—to reach the coveted “Eagle Scout” award—had to pass 21 different courses under the supervision of a master in each subject.  These were extremely useful trainings in things like being able to fix electrical wiring; repair a car; serve as a responsible citizen in our community and nation; perform emergency first aid; and all the like.

We had a very active and successful troop, and with the help of my family I was able to make it through to Eagle Scout.  I know this sounds corny, but imagine having the karmic seeds to meet an organization and dedicated group of fine, adult male role models who taught you almost everything you need for a successful and healthy life.  Again, I count this as crops pushed up from many, many seeds planted in the lifetimes before my birth.


Singing

My mother also enrolled us in the church choir, which was very well organized and featured special robes similar to those of the priests and acolytes.  I sang in the choir for something like ten years, participating in most of the church services held during that time.

I know that to many people it may sound corny to be a young person walking up and down the church aisle in a robe and singing hymns, but in truth it is a deep religious experience in itself.  We had very dedicated and expert choir directors, and I remember one (I don’t recall her name) who was a particularly tough taskmaster.

One day we were all rehearsing a hymn in the practice room, and suddenly she broke down and started sobbing at the piano.  Some of us rushed up to see if we could help her: “No, no children.  I’m all right.  Everything is all right.  That song was just...too beautiful, and it started me to crying, for joy!”  These are the kinds of people my old lifes’ seeds were pouring out.

This interest in music expanded, and in time I joined the high school chorus.  Our director was named Mr. Shaw, and he had a decided bias towards religious music; we spent months learning the Hallelujah Chorus from Handel’s Messiah, and performed it annually for our parents and friends.  This again I count as coming from before I was born.

When I was about 12, my brother and I put together a rock & roll band that was originally named “The Gremlins” and later became “Hymn.”  My parents were already divorced (what kind of past-life seed?), and the two brothers sold a shotgun that my Dad had used for hunting and left behind in our garage; with the money we bought some guitars.

In high school we wrote and performed for an audience of several hundred students & teachers a rock opera based on the life of Jesus, just before another such opera called “Jesus Christ Superstar” became a huge hit all over the United States .  I remember that one night we snuck into the cathedral at our church and took a photo of our band members raising our guitars in offering to the Cross..  Again all this was very serious to us, and there were some deep, older forces I believe inspiring us.

The premier band in those days was the Beatles, a group of four young Englishmen who eventually sold, it is estimated, over one billion records.  This was in the time before the internet and digital music: these albums were vinyl and came in a cardboard package, so a billion is rather unbelievable!

Again I take it as the impetus from my past life that, for me, the Beatles sang extraordinarily inspiring songs about our inner life, peace, and social responsibility.  When I attended university, I took some time off to travel with a musician friend to India in search of the Beatles, who had gone there and learned to play some traditional Indian instruments.

I myself was very inspired by the classical sitar, a complex kind of guitar with about 20 strings.  Traveling on a shoestring, in the Himalayan foothills (past seeds) I learned to play the instrument from a great Muslim musician named Mubarak Masih (seen here).  This was one of the first bridges I reached to the spirituality of the East; and it came to me through the rock & roll music that all of us young people were so in love with.  The Beatles’ song “In My Life” expresses for me my deepest feelings in this life.


Books

And then there were the books: different books for school and at church, but ultimately crossing over into an enlightened whole.

Rough tough Alaska trapper Father Paul had double duty to take us through our Bible classes, later on Sundays.  The Bible—the New Testament especially, the words of divine wisdom spoken by Christ—felt extraordinary to me.  We used the old King James translation, which I can say as a life-long Buddhist translator now, has to be one of the greatest translations ever completed.

On top of this we had the Book of Common Prayer, which contained all the services and rituals for our church life.  This had been translated and composed by Thomas Cranmer, the Archbishop of Canterbury, England, in 1549—which means it partly overlapped with the life of William Shakespeare.

Many of us felt that this prayer book was so eloquent and meaningful that Shakespeare himself must have had some influence in its editing.  There was also a story that resulted from Cranmer’s deep devotion to following the advices of Christ, including the one that we should return the harm done to us by others with even greater kindness than before.  It is said thus that people would steal from Cranmer, because they knew his response would be to offer them even more money than they had stolen.  Being exposed to such books I count as well as flowing from my past lives’ seeds.

I recall clearly a day when Father Paul walked into our children’s Sunday School class and laid on the table some new books that we would be learning.  First there were works by the great Christian thinker C.S. Lewis, including his matchless Screwtape Letters.  These are notes sent from the Devil to his nephew offering advice on how to corrupt a young man; the plot fails when the fellow dies thinking of being of service to others around him.  And no one can forget the Christ-like lion, Aslan, in Lewis’ children’s stories, The Chronicles of Narnia.

But the coup de grâce was when Father showed us a little pile of books by someone named J.R.R. Tolkien—Lewis’ close friend—entitled Lord of the Rings, and told us that here we would learn even more about the supreme value of sacrificing self for others.  This was a full 40 years before the Lord of the Rings movies came out.  What kind of seeds produced all these kinds of books, and teachers who found them for us, in my world!!

At school and at home, I also discovered science fiction books; again, they didn’t just walk by by accident: they were thrust into my hands by a past-life Michael.  My Mom made the mistake of saying that I could join the Science Fiction Book Club—which sent you new titles monthly—and order as many extra volumes as I liked.  Soon our garage walls were crammed with the books I’d gobbled my way through.

I think the one sci-fi author that influenced me most was the brilliant Robert A. Heinlein, who combined prophetic scientific detail with extraordinary social commentary.  Here I recall Stranger In A Strange Land—a deep investigation of ethics and our responsibility to society; I highly recommend it as the best fiction book I’ve ever read.  I have also never forgotten the final words of a book called The Tree of Time, written over six decades ago by Damon Knight: “God is not born in a day.”

These writings inspired me to write myself, and in high school I “just happened” to be assigned to an unusual two-year accelerated course in composition taught by Mrs. Kathryn Mortensen, a graduate of Chicago University—which at the time “just happened” to put out The Chicago Manual of Style, the writing standards for the entire United States.

Mrs. Mortensen was on the verge of retirement, and was a very tough taskmaster.  Every one of her 100+ students had to write an essay every day, and late into the night she would carefully read every single one and give the writer detailed suggestions on how to improve.  She basically had two rules: For every word you misspelled in an essay, your score was dropped by a whole grade: a “B” became a “C,” which would never get you into college.  We had no choice but to learn to spell, and check our spelling exactingly.  The second rule was that you would face the same results if you “padded” an essay: if you used more words than you had to, or said too much, with too little meaning.  We were all used to getting better grades for using more words, and this second rule took a lot of learning.

As I approached graduation from high school, I applied for more than ten colleges ranging from Harvard to the Coast Guard Academy (to please my Father), and was accepted into all of them.  I chose Princeton because the word “prince” attracted me; I had never seen any of these places.  At the same moment, I received a “personal” invitation from the President of United States to visit the White House to be awarded the Presidential Scholar Medal: one girl and one boy from each state was selected.

I mention this because I really don’t believe that I was one of the two best students out of a hundred thousand kids in high school in Arizona that year.  I sincerely believe there were past-life forces working behind all these events.  One important feature of karma is that a relatively small action or thought can bloom into a life-changing event, lifetimes later.

At Princeton—even though it was the era of the Vietnam War and radical peace movements and hippies working against that war—I continued to serve in the church, as an acolyte and volunteer to help the poor and hungry in different countries.  I also continued to work as a volunteer on weekends for the United Farm Workers, dedicated to helping the conditions of immigrant farm laborers in the US.  I was assigned to help a wonderful activist priest named Father Jim; we worked very hard and had a lot of successes.


First Buddhism

I joined the Department of Religion and naturally focused on courses in Christian thought, since early on I had already been promised to Episcopal Theological Seminary in Boston, to become a priest myself.  Princeton did have a total of two courses in Buddhism, ut somehow I steered away from taking them; I think I had an intuition that if I did, I would never come back.  Finally though I attended a foundation Buddhism class, taught by Prof. William LaFleur.

Dr. LaFleur had grown up in the United States but gone to Japan as a young scholar and gotten interested in poetry by Buddhist sages such as Saigyo, from the 12th century; he produced some of the first English translations of these classics.  Dr. LaFleur was also a very hip young professor in an era of hip; us students loved the fact that he could finish a lecture on medieval Japan’s Buddhist poetry, and then walk out and jump into his flashy red Firebird sports car.

Again, it had to be past life experiences that brought me into his class, to hear his wonderful explanations of Buddhist thought and meditation; to devour his ideas.  At this point—it was about 1973—I found out that my mother was very ill with cancer.  There was a tender moment when she called us four boys into her small bedroom, and told us she had something to show us.  We were shocked when she began to unbutton her blouse, but she insisted she had something we had to see.

Bravely she pointed to a lump on her breast and told us she had cancer, and could very well die from it.  She asked us each to touch the lump so we wouldn’t be scared of it, and then calmly outlined her plans for dying and doing the best she could to make sure we were all taken care of.  Looking back, I feel astounded by her courage and calmness, and again I have to believe she was crafted by my past goodness.

Back at Princeton I was halfway through my second course in Buddhism with Prof. LaFleur; classes at Princeton were really spread out across a huge campus, and we only had a few minutes to get from one to another—I was rushing.

Approaching 1879 Hall, I saw a student from my class sitting outside under a tree.  He was a boy from India whose name I didn’t know, but in my same class.  Glancing at him, he looked exactly like Lord Buddha sitting under the Bodhi Tree, on the very verge of enlightenment.  He motions me over—I hesitate, I have never been late for a class and I will be, if I pause to talk to him—but something tells me this is important.  I sit down at his side.

“Your Mother is dying,” he says.  I don’t know how he knew.

“Yes,” I nod.

“You want to help her,” he continues.

“Yes,” I say again.

He looks me square in the eyes.  “This university, Princeton, is one of the greatest schools in the world.  But there is absolutely nothing here that will help your Mother, or help you understand why she is dying.”

I didn’t answer.  The truth of what he was saying was obvious.  There was not—and there is still not—any academic course at Princeton in learning how to die, or being of real help to another person dying.  Which is strange, since dying is something we all have to do.  I look into his eyes and see the truth there.

Nothing more was said.  We stood up and went in and made it to class on time.

Walking down through the hall I pass the Religion Department bulletin board, crowded with notices.  There off to the side is a cheap sheet of blue paper with a picture on it.  I look closer.  There are three Tibetan Buddhist monks standing, looking at the camera; one older Lama in the middle, and two younger attendants standing to each side.  They look really peaceful and happy.  They have ridiculously big smiles.

Below the photo is an announcement for an immersion course in Buddhism to be held at a tiny institute in the foothills of the Himalayan mountains.  I know immediately that I have to go; after all, the Buddha had just predicted it!

Why was I drawn to a single tiny piece of paper, in my whole world at that time?  Why was I so attracted to the robes, the very first time I saw them?  Why did I have to become a monk, and a geshe, myself, years later?  Nothing that ever occurs in this world can occur without a cause, a cause that came before it.

Princeton was happy to approve my trip, and even gave me my scholarship money for the semester in cash, to pay for the trip and fees.  This was because I had already been arrested once for helping to block—in a peaceful, non-violent way—the entrance to a research facility on campus dedicated to making a better kind of napalm, for the war going on at that moment in Vietnam.

Napalm is a kind of jelly made from pure gasoline.  You put it in a bomb and fly over a Vietnamese village and drop the bomb and the jelly sprays all over everyone—men, women, and children—and sticks to their skin and burns through their body, an agonizing death.

Princeton had warned me that if I was arrested again I would be expelled forever.  But the napalm was still being produced.  We all knew I would get arrested again if I was anywhere nearby in the coming months.  I made the flight to India, and the rest—for me—is history.

Years later I am driving in a car in Australia, where I am giving some talks on the Diamond Cutter Sutra.  My driver is a devoted Buddhist who is also a college professor and an accomplished architect.  I remark to him how wonderful his attitude and aspirations are.

“Oh Geshe La, that’s not me!” he objects.

“Well then, who is it?”

“Oh that’s Joe—all of that is Joe’s fault!”

I feel a little twinge of jealousy.  Does he have another Buddhist teacher from the West?  Who is this Joe guy, anyway?

“Who’s Joe?” I ask.

He laughs happily.  “Oh, Joe—that’s me!  That’s my past life!  I can tell he must have been an amazingly good person!  Look where he got me to!”


The Garden

There is one more, strongest, indicator for me of my previous life’s hard work; and remember, the point of all this reminiscing is to establish an experiential version of the four arya truths that—in my opinion—first began long before the lifetime in which I saw emptiness directly.

After her divorce, my determined Mom went back to college to get a teaching degree, and then as the sole source of support for us four boys went to work as an elementary school teacher.  She used to point out to us that her teacher’s salary was less than that of a city garbage truck worker.

One day she came home and informed us four boys that we would be having guests at our upcoming Thanksgiving Day dinner, which was always a major affair at our house, with a huge feast despite our finances.

We didn’t pay that much attention, and in the morning on the given day we were out in the garage working on a homemade race car that we were trying to build.  I was under the car working on something; the garage door was opened; I could see just the tires and lower body of a cute Karmann Ghia car drive up and park nearby.  The door opens and some high heeled shoes step out on the sidewalk, attached to some legs that teenage boys would be very interested in.

That’s all we can see, but it’s enough to jump up and rush in and wash the grease off our hands and change into some clean clothes.

Turns out that my Mom’s fellow teacher, Anita Hancock, had 4 amazing daughters, just our age.  I personally was immediately smitten by the youngest, whose name was Veronica.  I felt as though we had known each other for a long time even before we ever met.  Here’s the conversation between me and my Mom after the Hancock ladies left that day.

Me: “Mom!  I really like that one daughter, by the name of Veronica!  Do you think I could ask her out?”

Mom: “Well Mike, you’re in luck.  They left a saucepan here, and we have to get it back to them.  Why don’t you drive it over there tomorrow?”

Me: “What do I do?”

Mom: “Ring the doorbell, and if the mom answers, then explain that you’re bringing back the saucepan but be sure to step inside the door, so she can’t close it.  And then steer the conversation around to asking her daughter out on a date!”

Moms are Masters of the Universe, and the plan worked perfectly.  Veronica and I saw a movie together, and then we ended up taking a long walk through a beautiful garden at my church.  There in the Garden—alone together—through countless evenings, my Lady taught me.  Given what I learned, and our marriage now that stretches back those nearly 60 years, I logically believe that we must have been closely tied together, many lifetimes before.  And what she has taught me, privately, during those decades I believe prepared me to touch the Diamond World, and walk the Diamond Way.


Assigning an aspect

At this point, I propose that we pause and assign one of the 16 moments en masse to the collection of these past-life experiences, confirmed through inevitable logic: no produced thing in the universe can occur without its own causes, and each of the events I have described here for my early life—from dancing in the chapel to sacred walks in the church garden—is a produced thing.  Each one must have had its causes in a time period previous to it.  And the only time available for that would have had to be one or more past lives.

Each of the events described here helped me to see emptiness directly, and this experience itself is the most important one that any human being can ever have, in the quest to stop suffering and bring all beings to never-ending happiness.  We would thus have to assign all these events together to the fourth higher truth: the truth of the path to the end of suffering.

Inside this one truth—again—are the four “aspects” or moments that we listed for it above: path, logic, means, and method.  Which of these four we assign here is, frankly, a judgement call.  None of the moments of any of the truths seems to necessarily come in any particular sequence; nor is any of the moments ever described so specifically—ever, in the last 25 centuries—that we can with certainty assign it to any particular personal experience, although in the end it has to be such an experience.

In my opinion, after 25 years of intense study in the geshe course and an equal number of years of the same intensity since completing it, aspect [14]—the aspect of “logic” (nyaya in Sanskrit)—is the most logical aspect of the truth of the path to assign to these previous lifetimes’ events.  This is because even an arya normally requires error-free logic to perceive these past-life events, which must have triggered their realizations inside of this present lifetime.

With this, we’ve completed the first of our seven groups of experiences within the overall journey to reach emptiness directly.  Now we’re ready to move on to the second group.



Group Two:
Preparing for the diamond world


In and out of meditation

There’s an important point that it’s time to make, in our exploration of the four higher truths.  In scripture these four are traditionally divided into experiences that take place during deep meditation, and then experiences that take place outside of such meditation.  This corresponds nicely with my own personal experience.

The technical terminology here can be expressed in Tibetan as nyam-shak (technical spelling mnyam-bzhag) and jetop (spelled rjes-thob).  In this case, nyam-shak refers to the period spent inside the direct perception of emptiness, whereas je-top refers to sort of a “popcorn” period of realizations popping up very actively just after—when we are more in a discursive state of mind.

In some traditional Buddhist systems this is reflected in the wording, shepa (technical spelling shes-pa) and supa (technical spelling bzod-pa).  Shepa means “understanding,” and again refers to the period inside of a realization.  Supa normally means “patience,” but it can also connote “mastery,” meaning that we are coming out of the direct realization and entering a period of appreciating it.  The associated realization could be the direct perception of emptiness, or other topics as well.

These distinctions can help us understand the 16 moments of the four truths in more detail.  We have just reserved one of the 16 for early experiences in this present life that tie back to deduced source experiences in earlier lifetimes.  Many of these experiences would be outside of meditation.  And it is my personal experience that the same holds for most of the other of the 16, even in this present life.


Connection to the five paths

It’s a good time here to talk about the interrelation between the four truths, my own experiences, and a traditional realization flowchart known as the “five paths.”  The five paths are used to describe the period from the time that one truly becomes interested in spiritual issues, on up to the point of enlightenment itself.

The first path is called the “path of accumulation,” and it refers specifically to a period of spiritual searching in our life triggered by some kind of traumatic event, such as the death of a parent.  During this time of personal pain, we begin to “accumulate” the good karmic seeds necessary to see emptiness directly at the third path.

The second path is named the “path of preparation,” and refers to an intense period of intellectual understandings which directly pave the way for the direct perception of emptiness.  The third path then is the all-important “path of seeing,” referring to the direct perception itself.

This is followed by the “path of habituation,” a longish period during which we get used to what we saw during the direct perception, and immediately afterwards.  This accustomation then delivers us to nirvana and enlightenment itself.

“Nirvana” literally means “blowing out,” and represents the permanent destruction of all negative emotions accomplished by the realizations related to seeing emptiness directly.  And then finally countless scriptures describe how—if that nirvana is accompanied by what we call “bodhichitta,” or an intense intention to help all beings in the universe—then we come to our own total enlightenment, and become a Buddha ourselves.  The nirvana and Buddhahood here then are the fifth and final path, known as the “path of no more learning.”

Let’s look now at these five “paths” or states of spiritual growth, in my own specific case.  Again, this is not for purposes of boasting or making false claims.  I am sincerely just hoping to help you reach the direct perception of emptiness yourself.


First path: accumulation, of sadness

As I’ve alluded to above, it was the illness and death of my Mother I think that put me upon the first of the five paths to emptiness.  She loved us four brothers with a never-failing devotion: despite the abusive experiences of her marriage (which I remember included physical beatings), and the difficult financial circumstances, and the intense hard work at home and in her job, she never failed to show intense love and care for us, and for other people and the young students in her life as well.

During the troubles with my father, he had taught her to drink, at the level of a young sailor returning from war—and she had become an alcoholic.  On the day that she left to start her new life with us four boys, she stopped completely.  To see her fight her way back to a normal life in a beautiful house that she earned on her own, and then watch as the cancer took her life, represented for me the first of the five paths.

In fact I saw emptiness directly within 4 months after her very painful death; my brother found her on the floor with her entire life’s blood poured out all around her, as the cancer chewed through a major artery.  She had a Bible in her hand—and that’s who she was.

The first of the four higher truths is of course the truth of suffering, and the first [1] of the 16 aspects we listed above was impermanence, or anitya in the Sanskrit.  My mother’s sad death was, for me, this particular aspect in real life.


A different kind of emptiness

There is something confusing about several of the four aspects of the first higher truth—the truth of suffering—that we could pause and clear up here.  As we will see below, when we get to the “pot on the stove” and subsequent realizations, understandings of emptiness are not something that characterizes this first path, of accumulating sadness about the inevitable course our life here will take.

There are though two aspects here that seem to refer to these understandings, and we need to explain why they are here, out of proper order.

The first of these [3] is simply called “emptiness” (shunya, in the Sanskrit).  Given where it stands in the list, we need to take this as a continuation of the impermanence and suffering that we’ve just covered.  We need to take it as the emptiness of a life that has no meaning.

Buddhists have said for centuries that every aspect of our life is suffering, but our own experience seems to contradict this.  Here I think of the example of my Father.  He had grown up in a simple household in the midwestern United States without a lot of money, but enough to get by.  When World War II broke out, he was still in his teens, but he volunteered for military service.

He was assigned to duty on a submarine in the Pacific, which was extremely dangerous and traumatic—there were many submarines during the war that simply disappeared, never to be heard from again, presumably lying full of dead sailors on the bottom of the ocean.

When he returned a few years later—alive and much, much older—Dad recalled the weather and the economic opportunities of naval ports he had passed through during the war: places like Los Angeles or San Diego.  I think surviving a war has an effect on some soldiers where they come back really wanting to make a success of the rest of their life, and my Dad was in this category.

He attacked his life with gusto, learning the business of building whole neighborhoods of family homes.  He is responsible for entire areas of both Los Angeles and San Diego—and (in a boom or bust fashion) he made a lot of money.  During some of his best years, he bought and renovated a very expensive home nearby the ocean; met and married a very special second wife; and even bought a fairly large, retired Navy ship for overnight drinking and fishing parties at sea, with his friends.

And then—not long after my Mom passed away—he too contracted cancer, and died a long and agonizing death.  In my world, this then was the aspect or “moment” of [3] emptiness as a component of the truth of suffering: that in the end there was literally nothing that remained of my Dad’s entire life of success, possessions, and friends.  And we are all headed for that very same ending.

The next and final aspect of the truth of suffering is called [4] “no self-nature” (anatma in the Sanskrit).  Again, if taken in its usual meaning this moment belongs down in the third truth, of the cessation of suffering.  I would say here that the sufferings in our life are—in the end—what we make of them: they are not one way or another in and of themselves.

This relates to the central Buddhist practice of turning misfortunes into a path for progress.  Break-ups of friends and marriages and in our employment often end up this way: a rainbow coming out after a rainy day.  The loss of both my parents left me stranded in this life, but then I was available for the coming Fr. Tims, Prof. LaFleurs, and Khen Rinpoches.


Second path: preparing to see

Here I would like to begin to record a good number of experiences that would traditionally be included into the second path, of preparation to touch emptiness directly.  How we organize all of these events into the 16 moments, we’ll have to work on: again, we don’t have historical references clear enough to help us greatly.

First and foremost here, I did end up taking over a year off of my normal Princeton degree work to study in the foothills of the Himalayas.  These were blessed times in academia when we were encouraged to get out of the universities and actually experience other cultures first-hand.  I spent most of a semester learning with those three joyful monks in the photograph. First here was Geshe Ngawang Dhargyey, who had received received his geshe, or “Master of Buddhism” degree, after 25 years of study at Sera Monastery, which until the Cultural Revolution in China had been one of the oldest and largest monasteries in history, with thousands of monks.

Geshe Dhargyey was assisted by two young tulkus.  A “tulku” is a monk who is considered the reincarnation of a Buddhist master who has passed away, and returned as a new baby to continue helping people.  First here was Sharpa Tulku, Tenzin Trinley Rinpoche, who became a close friend and mentor during those studies.  He was accompanied by Khamlung Rinpoche, another young reincarnation and kindly friend.  As teenagers, both had lived in the Mongolian refugee community of Howell, New Jersey, which we will be meeting shortly.  They had learned English at the local high school, and were translating for Geshe Dhargyey in our classes in the Himalayas.

During these studies I received word from my Mom that she had been asked to leave her job at the elementary school, because the cancer had reached her brain and she was having epileptic seizures, sometimes in front of her fifth-grade schoolchildren.  Sharpa Rinpoche suggested that I might want to bring her there to the Himalayas to receive treatment from masters of Tibetan medicine, and also meet high lamas who could assist her through the death process, if it came to that.

This I did; Mom of course ended up organizing art classes for the local refugee kids, and within a month or two we thought it safer to bring her back to the States; she was now often having major epileptic seizures.  But she and I had the deep honor of attending daily classes taught by Geshe Dhargyey together—she propped up against a pillar and wrapped in blankets.  Together we learned The Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, a very famous presentation of Buddhist perfections and emptiness by the 8th-century Indian emptiness master Shantideva.  In the current translation, in fact, this text plays a major role; and I ended up writing my honors thesis at Princeton on its presentation of the perfection of giving.

When it became clear that I would have to return to the States to bring my Mom home to pass away with family, I began asking around about teachers who might be in the Princeton area.  This is how I found out about Khen Rinpoche Geshe Lobsang Tharchin, and within a few weeks of my return to the US I attended lectures by him at both Columbia University and Princeton on topics such as emptiness, according to the Heart Sutra.

Upon graduation, as I will outline below, I was able to begin studies of the classics of Buddhism—especially Higher Knowledge, or Abhidharma; and Reasoning, or Pramana—directly from Khen Rinpoche for two or three hours ever day, most often in private.  It is no small factor here that—living with Khen Rinpoche—I was automatically within a two-minute walk of the only surviving copy of the Kangyur collection of Buddhist classics in the western hemisphere, not to mention Rinpoche’s own considerable collection of manuscripts.  This early work in the philosophical tradition of Buddhism was crucial for my direct perception of emptiness; foremost here was the idea of chi-jedrak, which absolutely has to be learned before we can see emptiness.  So let’s go into it some, now.


Chi-jedrak: quality & characteristic

Young monks at one of the major monastic universities typically study Buddhist logic very early on—say, around the age of 15 or even younger; this is because clear thinking is an essential for all the formal classes and work in the monastery debate ground that they will be laboring through for the next 25 years, until they take their geshe examinations.

This topic traces back to the Buddha himself—who is famous for his philosophical debates with other thinkers of his time—and is studied nowadays primarily from a medieval commentary named A Commentary on Accurate Perception, written by the Indian master Dharmakirti around 650ad.

A young geshe candidate goes through the five great topics of the geshe course on an average of five years each; the combined degree then is similar in commitment to earning five separate degrees at a typical American university.  Clear thinking though is considered so important that we devote about a quarter of the year to it, every one of the 25 years of the geshe course.

And so Khen Rinpoche was trying to get me up to speed.  Unfortunately, the ancient Asian vocabulary for formal logic especially is so difficult that it takes years to learn, even if explained in your native language.  But here we had a 22-year-old American and a 55-year-old Tibetan with almost no English trying to communicate with each other in these abstruse Asian terms.

As we will see, Rinpoche was living at a traditional Mongolian temple in the middle of New Jersey, among refugees from World War II who were very poor.  There was no housing at the temple for a starry-eyed young American, so I was bedding down in a sleeping bag on the concrete floor of a broken-down, abandoned car repair garage nearby.  I would spend the days at a small table in Rinpoche’s kitchen, and at night walk back to my dungeon to sleep.

Khen Rinpoche is trying to teach me an extremely difficult dialectics term known in Tibetan as chi-jedrak (technical spelling spyi bye-brag).  Expressed in his few English words, it is completely unintelligible.  We spent two hours on it today and basically both gave up.  I’m walking back through the pitch dark to my old garage and have almost decided just to surrender and go back to my shishi university life and try to be a professor somewhere.

I have to cross through some pretty thick woods, and I pause in a particularly dark part, under a tree naked of leaves.  This is allowing the moon to swoop down and offer me some comfort.  I look up, and the light pours in.  Slowly my mood flips, and right there right then I remember saying to myself, “Dammit, I’m going to learn this thing, no matter how long it takes!”  Instead of pursuing a career as a formal logic hater, I throw myself into mastering it.

And I did—starting with chi jedrak.

Chi usually means “general,” or “overall”; typically you would think of it as an overall group, such as all the cars in the world.  And then jedrak refers to one of the members of the group, such as the Toyota car out in your own driveway.

But then suddenly I have this unique insight into the two terms, where chi refers to a general quality of something; and jedrak refers to something being characteristic of that quality, of embodying it.  I have this breakthrough understanding of chi jedrak not as set & subset, but rather of chi as something like car-ness and jedrak as something like a particular car which has the quality of car-ness.

If we sit with this idea over the period of a fairly serious meditation, or a bunch of meditations, we can suddenly have a breakthrough where we consider the possibility that all the cars we’ve ever looked at or driven in were—somehow—opinions of car-ness.  This thought takes some time to “cook” in our mind (as Khen Rinpoche would put it), but under the right conditions it is, in my estimation, a direct ticket to the direct perception of emptiness.

That is, if the other, supporting conditions are all there; and now we’ll take a look at some of those.  But before we do, I would pause and attempt to assign a pair of the 16 aspects to these last few realizations: of undertaking a formal course of study of the mighty Buddhist classics; and enjoying that breakthrough with quality & characteristic.

Personally I would categorize an in-depth study of the Buddhist classics—and more particularly, the five geshe subjects—as [15] a “means” (pratipatti in the Sanskrit) of enabling the fourth truth, the path to the end of suffering.  My own case shows that this doesn’t necessarily involve for example decades of time spent in this current lifetime with these great books: if a person even has the karmic seeds to encounter the books or a place where they are regularly studied, or a teacher capable of imparting them correctly, this would surely indicate that the individual had massive seeds from multiple past lifetimes of contact with these readings and concepts.  In other words, people with special seeds could see emptiness directly with no more than a “brush-up” of ideas like chi-jedrak.  Similar to what happened to me.

Giving birth to an intimate realization of chi-jedrak is sufficiently crucial that I would list it as a separate aspect of the Four Truths; and I would connect it to moment [16]: “method,” or nairyanika in the Sanskrit.  This is because the structure of the Sanskrit implies that this specific concept is a sine qua non: an absolute necessity or prerequisite for touching the diamond world of emptiness.

A final note on this particular aspect.  There is, admittedly, that famous reference in the sutras which says that the Group of Five—the five tiger cubs—did receive a teaching on the four truths of an arya and did, each of them, perceive emptiness upon the completion of three rounds of hearing the four.

We also see descriptions, in sutra, of people like King Udrayana or the Lady of Pearl, who—it is said—saw emptiness directly, immediately after laying eyes on the Wheel of Life painting designed for them by Lord Buddha.

Now we noted, previously, that some of the 16 aspects here are perceived directly, in a deep state of meditation.  Others are perceived “around” such meditations, either before or after.  But I can say categorically, with no exceptions, that to see emptiness directly you must at the time be in a deep state of formal meditation, sitting in formal meditation posture.

References to people having a perception of emptiness while chopping wood or something of the like refer—without any question—to the discursive type of thinking about emptiness that we will describe below, with the “pot on the stove.”  This is not the direct perception, and does not represent “entering the stream,” or a direct pathway to nirvana and Buddhahood.

This means that what happened in these famous accounts from sutra is that people received careful and extended instruction on emptiness, and were afterwards able to go into a deep state of meditation and touch it directly.  I believe that this is reflected in the fact that the Group of Five were granted teachings on emptiness over a period of 7 years total; this period is sometimes referred to a “first turning of the Wheel of the Dharma” or “the Wheel of the Dharma on the four truths.”  Even with an exceptional previous birth, this time frame would make more sense than just a few minutes, and a quick repetition three times, standing in the heat of the West Bengal jungle.


Deep meditation:
the room at the top

Another preliminary to the direct perception of emptiness agreed upon by all authoritative sources is that we must be capable of the deep meditation—the absolute stillness of mind—necessary to catch sight of emptiness.

Textually speaking, this is the state of shamatha (technical spelling śamatha, which in classical Tibetan translates into zhi-gnas or “residing in peace”).  During the direct perception, this is half of the ultimately powerful union of shamatha and vipashyana (technical spelling vipaśyanā; in classical Tibetan, lhag-mthong or “special sight”).  “Special sight” here refers to a deep insight into emptiness, or the fact that the object of our focus is devoid of coming from its own side.

In my own case, I had learned the traditional, accurate details of formal meditation from my teachers in the Himalayas—and again, I deduce, had come into this life with a solid habit for it from many past-life years of meditation.  And I had been training in a perfect location.

Flying back from India to finish the final semester of my degree at Princeton, I was very aware that I hadn’t arranged any place to stay once I had landed in the USA.  I had this recurring thought in my mind though that there might be an available room at the top of the priest’s residence at the Procter Foundation.  This is a beautiful classic old Princeton professor’s house in the same neighborhood where Albert Einstein once lived.

But to make those arrangements, I would have to meet and do some really persuasive talking with the current priest, Rev. Timothy Cogan—who lived there with his wife Ruth, and their two small boys John and Milo (Episcopal priests are allowed to marry and have families).

The flight though was late getting into Kennedy Airport, and it was 9 or 10pm by the time I got off the bus at campus.  The odds of arranging to “just run into” Fr. Tim were zero.  But something told me to go to the late-night student cafe, which had just opened.  There in the darkened room, alone amongst a hundred or two empty seats, was the Father, for some reason having a coffee in the middle of the night.  This is how the last days go for someone who is about to touch the diamond world.

Fr. Tim seemed to already know exactly what I would ask for, and immediately agreed that during this final semester, I would be allowed to live in the beautiful empty third floor of the priest’s residence.  I just had to babysit the kids (4 and 2 years old, respectively) two nights a week, so that the Cogans could get out for a rare date together.

The reason I mention all this is that this third-floor nook turned out to be the absolutely perfect meditation chamber.  It was elevated above the lovely medieval Princeton stone buildings, halfway it seemed into the blue sky.  On a normal day it was absolutely silent up there.

With persistent daily practice, I was able to work up to 60 minutes of truly silent meditation.  I learned that if my legs fell asleep in my half-lotus posture (full lotus I would say is not required, and even distracting), I could just wait through the pins and needles and in a few minutes I couldn’t feel them at all.  I learned to take my breathing down—very naturally, and with no pushing—to extremely slow.

The meditation subjects I focused on were very traditional, taken from the “steps of the path” (lam-rim) teachings I had received in India, with a focus on the methodology of the matchless Bhavana Krama, or “Stages of Meditation” trilogy of the medieval meditation teacher Master Kamalashila.

Somehow I had the wisdom to shave my busy Princeton undergraduate course load down, to allow me to focus on my practice.  I remember that—for the first time in my life—I had the insight that a great deal of my scholastic overworking was simple hubris, just trying to look like someone who was more than normal.

I was for example already a respectable sitar player, and had even played several concerts in India.  I had signed up for a course in classical Indian music at the very demanding Princeton Department of Music.  I suddenly realized that if I cut any unnecessary activities, my meditation could go deeper.  I went to the professor of the Indian music course and—for the first time in my life—dropped a course.

A few months later I played a concert at Princeton for a charity; I remember the quizzical look I got from the same professor when I bumped into him on the way out of the concert hall!

There was a meditation “event” here that is important I think; it gives insight into how deep we need to get, to see emptiness directly.  I was sitting in a special reading room on the northwest side of the first floor of Princeton’s exquisite Firestone Library.  The room has stacks of books all round on fragrant hardwood shelves; and several multistory walls are all glass, with soft sunlight flooding across the silent room.  I was working on some kind of homework assignment, very focused.

At some point I suddenly realized that I hadn’t taken a breath for over ten minutes.  I had been surfing since I was about 8 or 9 years old, and I knew that anybody would pass out at about 3 minutes.  It was, of course, the focus; but the event had deeper implications, the more I thought about it.  The bottom line was that my life was not being maintained by breath, or by food or water either.  I understood, in that moment, that seeds in my mind were keeping me alive: raw karma.

There is a final realization that belongs here.  As my daily meditation sessions up on the third floor were getting deeper and longer, the two toddlers started to get more and more curious about what I was doing up there, so quiet, so long.

One day they climbed up the stairs (rather noisily) and slipped into my room.  I was deep, and I decided it was more important that I stay there, than to chastise them for interrupting me.  At first they played around the room, pulling on my hair and giggling.  I determined not to move.  I stayed deep.

Suddenly, by some kind of common consent, they sat down next to me and started to meditate silently.  Strange, I thought, for a 2-year-old and a 4-year-old.  The three of us stayed in the silence for quite a long time, and from then on we often meditated together.

Soon it was the end of March, the 30th, of that year; a Sunday—Easter Sunday—and I was doing my babysitting job during the day.  My mother (staying with my brother and his wife in California) would die three days later, and on some level everyone in my family could feel it coming.  I was downstairs in Procter House, and because of the holiday they were playing the famous children’s film, Wizard of Oz, on the TV.  The boys and I were watching it together.

This movie tells a famous story about all of us having the potential to be whatever we most dream of being, if we come to recognize who we truly are, inside.  All three of us watched in silence, spellbound.  Suddenly I had the overwhelming knowledge that these two small boys were themselves already enlightened—already Buddhas—and that they were intent on guiding me there themselves.  It was a moment I have never forgotten—a synergy between the diamond world and the Diamond Way.

To summarize, the ancient classics of Buddhism over the last two thousand years or so have insisted that we need to be in that very deep state of meditation—shamatha—in order to perceive emptiness directly.  Of the hundreds of states of mind that a person can reach in deep meditation, there is a particular level—no less focused, but no less aware either—that is perfect for this direct contact with emptiness.

The level is called samten dangpoy nyerdok Michok mey (technical spelling bsam-gtan dang-po’i nyer-bsdogs Mi-lcogs med).  In my experience, you have to be able to stay perfectly unmoving in a state of deep meditation for one hour to reach it.  Frankly speaking, this means that if you cannot remain in a meditation session (and I am not including the traditional preliminary prayers and breath work and so on leading into such a session) for at least one hour, then there is no chance at all that you will ever see emptiness directly.

Remember that—according to classics of Buddhism such as the one that you hold in your hands right now—each one of us will continue to suffer through intense pain, and death, for lifetime after lifetime, unbroken, until the day that we see emptiness directly.  And so I literally beg you to get your meditation practice on track.

The only place to start is with ten minutes a day, following the instructions of a bona fide meditation master, and then build up very slowly and gradually—increasing say one minute per week—until you reach the 60 minutes deep down.  There is no other way, and you have no choice.

Reaching the ability to stay in meditation long enough to see emptiness directly is so crucial that I would assign it to one of the four aspects or moments within the higher truth of the path to the end of suffering, all on its own accord.  In my opinion, the first aspect of this truth—overall aspect [13]—corresponds to the ability to reach and remain at this level for a solid hour.  This aspect, as we have seen above, is itself referred to as “path,” or marga in the original Sanskrit.

Here within moment [13]—the aspect of the “path”—I would add another circumstance that was going on in my life at the time.  During my earlier years at Princeton I was pretty much like every other undergraduate, in my personal habits and appearance.  At my Mom’s insistence, I had appeared on campus the first day wearing a full business suit and tie.

Then though arrived the days of the hippie movement: a nationwide movement of young people away from materialism and towards inner development—which I count as another blessing sent me by my dear past-life Michael.  I had soon grown my hair out to match that of my rock & roll inspirations, and turned in my suits for worn-out jeans and tank tops.

My freshman year—following a university requirement to join a sport—I spent the whole year competing on the rowing team, and for the next two years I weightlifted, when my rowing coach said it might endanger my heart if I didn’t.

The bottom line here I think is that I took as much pride in my hippie’s physical appearance as if I had worn that suit the whole time.  Part of what I learned during my time in the Himalayas though was that I would not be able to meditate deeply if my mind was distracted, even slightly, by trying to look cool to my peers.  By the time I had returned to Princeton to finish my degree, I dressed very simply and kept my hair cut in an unremarkable way; and I believe that turning this percentage of my attention to deeper things helped me a lot to reach shamatha.

There is even a word for this sort of attitude in the ancient Buddhist books of Abhidharma, or Higher Knowledge.  It’s called du-chung chok-shey (technical spelling ‘dod-chung chog-shes).  This basically means giving up any desire to buy fancy new clothes, and making close friends with your old, comfortable clothes.

Again, this is all part of a code of simplicty in your personal life that allows you to focus all your mental space on your practice.  There’s no mental catalog of all the different pairs of shoes you own, because you only own one pair.

Remember, cooking up emptiness is no different than cooking up your mother’s favorite stew.  The recipe calls for 16 different ingredients, and you cannot leave any one of them out and expect it to taste the same as your Mom’s.  Learn the 16; learn to make this stew, and your life is saved.  Then, only then, can you save the lives of others.


My delivery to Khen Rinpoche

The first week of June that year, 1975, was a busy time for me.  After losing a year in my overseas studies, I was finally going to graduate—and I was tying things up in preparation for moving to study with Khen Rinpoche at the Mongolian temple, 45 minutes and an entire universe away.  Given that I would see emptiness directly within two more months, it’s worth it I think to go through some of the details here.

Meditation-wise, I was following not a crazy but a very regular daily morning practice.  I had cut my social calendar down to a few closest friends—guys that I played music with, or worked with at a warehouse on the edge of campus.  As part of my scholarship I was required to put in about 20 hours a week at a trucking company that handled all the university’s food and material deliveries; before leaving for India I had worked up to the student manager’s position.

I got permission to use the university trucks to drive around the dormitories and park outside the entrances, where I put up big signs to encourage especially the wealthy kids to throw their no-longer-needed winter jackets and sweaters into big cardboard boxes.  I sorted the clothes in the basement at Procter House and shipped the best and warmest items off to refugees in the Himalayan towns where I had studied.

I was also wrapping up my volunteer position with a world food relief project at the church, and I remember I was in a meeting there when Father Tim came in and led me away to his office to tell me my Mom had just died.

Over the years I had been working three jobs to make enough money to get to India, and to pay off the last of my student debt.  There was the truck driving, and in fact I missed my Princeton graduation ceremony because I had to do deliveries that day.  Secondly, I was in a “Arabic fusion” rock & roll band, and we had a weekly paying gig at a bar in town.  

During breaks at the bar, I studied for my Russian quizzes.  I had already taken three years of it and was one of the few survivors; about 90% had dropped out of the class.  I was probably the worst of the survivors, but since I was on scholarship I got first priority for student researcher jobs—and so a famous Slavic scholar named Herman Ermolaev had me writing out citations for him on piecework payment.

During that last week at Princeton, I withdrew all my savings in cash, and marched down to the registrar’s office, and paid off all my student debt, to the last dime.  It left me with just enough to survive for the next few months at my new home in the garage behind the Mongolian temple.  I think that making a clean break with my former life—especially financially—was important for clearing my mind and going deeper with my meditations, in the final months before emptiness.

Scholastically, I wrapped up as well.  I had been required to finish up a final Russian course credit, and had the good fortune to know Dr. Ellen Chances, a brilliant and caring young assistant professor.  Together we worked out a plan where I could do an independent study of work by Russian scholars on ancient Buddhist Sanskrit classics.

I chose to focus, again, on Master Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life; looking back I believe this and the other Middle Way classics (such as the present translation) are crucial to helping us see emptiness.  There was an important Russian manuscript of Shantideva’s work at the Nicholas Roerich Museum in Manhattan that no one would permit out of the building.  And so once every week or two I would take the bus into New York to labor over it, and this got me to the end of my degree requirements.  

The only thing left was the final oral defense of my senior undergraduate thesis; this took place at Princeton’s Department of Religion, with a handful of my favorite professors, and again I had a very important diamond-way moment with them.  In the end I was one of the few religion majors to be awarded honors. 

A couple of times a week I would walk over to Prof. LaFleur’s home (a few doors away), and we would sit down and meditate together between huge piles of academic papers and books.  I had been told (wrongly) that Khen Rinpoche didn’t like music, so I gave my quite-expensive sitar away to the two small boys at Procter House; many years later when we had a chance to connect, they told me they never forgot it.

In the second week then of June, I was free and ready to leave the university and head off for my studies with Khen Rinpoche.  None of us had the slightest clue that I would end up spending 25 years at the Mongol temple.  Prof. LaFleur offered to drive me and my few bags, in his famous red sports car.  Father Tim and his family made one last appeal for me to spend the rest of my life at Procter House as a nanny, and I was actually tempted.  But then we were off.

Again, I tell all these things because I am trying to help you see emptiness too.  It seems it was important that I was willing to change my entire life to see it.  There was a stark difference between the wealth and ordered life at Princeton, and this tiny community of shattered and impoverished refugees in the highway strip town of Howell, where the Mongol temple was located.

Prof. LaFleur knocks on the door of the tiny house behind the Buddhist temple.  There is this most tender moment when Khen Rinpoche opens the door and takes my arm in his hand.  Prof. LaFleur lets go of my other arm: “Take good care of him.”  Khen Rinpoche: “Yes, yes.  I will make a wise man out of him.”  Prof. LaFleur turns to go back to his beautiful car, but then suddenly he presses the car key into my hand.  “You keep it.  Good luck!”  He walks out to the street and gets into the waiting car of a friend, and he’s off.  I’m standing there with my mouth wide open.  Rinpoche guides me in.


From the top of the ladder

Khen Rinpoche had survived the bombing of his monastery, and the death of thousands of his fellow monks.  He had walked over the Himalayas to survive, the last few hundred miles without shoes.  He was a tough man, and a tough taskmaster.  No Princeton undergraduate coddling at his temple!

First of all, we were both outsiders at the Temple.  This was a small town cobbled together in what had been a swamp in the middle of New Jersey, and populated almost exclusively by several thousand Mongolians.  They were a special type of Mongol, named Kalmyks.  The very name “Kalmyk” means that these were the front-line soldiers seven centuries before that had very nearly conquered all of Europe.  During that march west through Central Asia and Tibet, they had somehow become Buddhists.

Most recently, their small Eastern European country had been taken over by the Nazi army advancing towards Russia.  Most of their countrymen had been exterminated—often in concentration camps—since Asians were considered as offensive to the Master Race as the Jewish people.  What I was walking into was the few who had survived these horrors, often jumping over the barbed wire of the camps and surviving wild for years in the surrounding forests.  They were just as tough as Khen Rinpoche, and hardly understood the idea that some young American would want to come learn to see emptiness at their temple.

Khen Rinpoche though was a different sort of man; he had been sent to the West by some of the highest lamas alive, and he considered it his honor and responsibility to serve this small community of refugees.  Together we worked to make the Temple a little Buddha paradise on earth.

This included loading and driving countless truckloads of construction garbage to the local dump, then pulling out (by hand) the stumps of huge oak trees left behind.  One particularly stubborn stump took us several years of labor.  Rinpoche and I learned to mix up thousands of pounds of concrete, pouring new sidewalks and laying in beautiful flower gardens.

The Mongolian refugees had all arrived at about the same age—say, in their forties—almost 30 years before.  Now they were all equally elderly and needed our help with just about everything.  Rinpoche announced that my position at the Temple was Chipay Ta, which translates as “public horse.”

I was made available all day, every day, to take people in my snazzy red sports car to their doctor appointments; grocery shopping; and to stand in the long lines at the immigration or social security offices.  Suddenly it seemed that my impulsive decision to study Russian at Princeton had been preordained, since I could speak to all of the Mongolians, and translate for them out in the everyday world.

I became Khen Rinpoche’s personal servant and cook as well, which was actually a really good deal.  For every hour I spent under the house fixing ancient plumbing pipes, he made sure I got an hour of private classes in the greatest philosophical classics of ancient Asia.

In time, I built a large, separate structure where Khen Rinpoche could have his private quarters, along with a comfortable classroom for his public classes.  I also used the carpentry skills my Dad had taught me to build housing nearby for the 7 or 8 surviving ancient Mongolian monks at the temple.

Here’s a typical day during that labor.  I am up on the very top of a very dangerous extension ladder, finishing off painting the underside of the roof about three stories high above.  There’s no one to help me; nobody to hold the ladder steady, and if I forget say a cleaning rag I have to climb all the way down and back up on my own.

Old Man Umadikov suddenly shows up, grabbing the bottom of the ladder and threatening to pull it out and kill me in the process.  He is especially scary because he was a cavalry soldier during the Russian Revolution, for the Cossacks: the Warrior Brotherhood of Mother Russia.  The only way you get into this squad is if you fight a sword duel with another member of the Brotherhood and win.  He has a terrible long, angry scar down the side of his stone face from his duel.  I assume the other man was killed.  Now he’s like 80 years old and permanently angry.

“Hey Mike, get down here!  I gotta go to the grocery store!”

“No hey, Mr. Umadikov, just let me finish painting this soffit, and then I’ll jump down and get you there!”

“I gotta go now!  Get down here!”  He starts shaking the bottom of the ladder.  I’m going to die!

The point is though that Rinpoche demanded that we both serve all the old people with devotion, and grace.  We ended up doing so for over 25 years, and I believe that the energy from this service—even early on—was essential to my seeing emptiness directly.  

I believe that this taking care of the needy around us, with careful grace, was as much a factor in seeing emptiness as was the study and the meditation.  And that’s why I mention it here, for those of you seeking the same goal.  In my opinion, then, we can add this continual, devoted, and kindly service of the needy ones around us as a part of [15] the “means” aspect of the higher truth of the path to the end of pain—along with the general study of the classics we’ve already mentioned.

I would like to add here that specific service of individuals who are trying to spread or preserve the wisdom teachings which include instruction on how to see emptiness directly is a special cause to see it ourselves; which means I would add it, again, to [15] the aspect or “moment” of the means of stopping pain.

During my decades serving Khen Rinpoche, for example, I was almost always his driver when he needed to go somewhere; for example, to Washington DC during his English studies at Georgetown University, or monthly trips to the same city for many years to teach a group of students he eventually organized there.  When his English had reached the level that he could translate ancient classics from Tibetan, I carefully edited the books and typed them out (no computers even, in those days).

We were too poor to have the books printed, and so I studied hand bookbinding under a local master, and made all the necessary tools myself by cutting up thick sheets of brass, by hand.  Our first editions were printed on a hand press in our basement, and bound there too, one by one, painstakingly.  I add these details here because I believe that all of this kind of service of the Dharma as well contributed—in my case—to aspect [15]: the means, of the path, to see emptiness directly.



Group Three:
The pot on the stove


Momos and frozen macaroni

Khen Rinpoche and I quickly settled into a rhythm.  He stayed in the parish house, which was a tiny dwelling meant for a single monk who stepped over to the temple a few times a day to check the butter lamps were burning brightly and any elderly visitors were taken care of.  There was a super tiny bed in a little nook of a bedroom, and Rinpoche would perch up there sometimes to teach me the ancient books, while I sat on the floor.

Rinpoche was of the opinion that since I was born an American, I was automatically able to fix anything made in the United States: his watch, or the Volkswagen bug someone gave him later on.  I always gave it a go and only occasionally broke things completely trying to fix them (like that Volkswagen).  But I was handy and had soon put together a big collection of tools for all kinds of repairs around the temple grounds.

The other thing I was expected to do was to cook for him—and that was a bit of a disaster.  He quickly learned that my entire repertoire of dishes was opening cans of cheap food, or heating up frozen macaroni dinners.

On the next block though there was an ancient blind Mongolian lama who had a really good cook, a chubby smiley old Chinese monk named Gendun Jamtso.  Rinpoche enlisted him to come and give me lessons in cooking his favorite dishes—especially mo-mos, sort of a special dumpling that Rinpoche was crazy about.

Above all, I quickly learned to make Tibetan butter tea just the way that Rinpoche liked it.  This means I mixed in black Chinese tea leaves; sea salt; old butter; thick cream; tons of boiled milk and sometimes nutmeg or the like.  Then it had to be churned, sometimes in an old wooden churn: swoosh swoosh until just the right consistency, and just the right temperature.  My teacher would send back a cup of tea that wasn’t perfect five or six times, if he wasn’t happy with it.

The tea would take so long to boil to the right thickness that I learned to practice memorizing my scriptures, reciting out loud standing by myself there in the kitchen, as I watched the pot bubble.  I quickly reached the point—for example—where even before I knew what all the words meant I could recite the first three chapters of the famous Treasure House of Higher Knowledge, the Abhidharma Kosha, written almost two thousand years earlier.


Luminous images

And so on this day—July 28, 1975—four or five days after the full moon, I was standing in front of the stove, staring at a pot of water as it started to boil.  Something happened then, suddenly, but I want to make sure that you appreciate that it didn’t happen by accident, or just because of the last few hours or days before it.

That is, I hope you will think of all the pages I’ve written here so far, all the way back to things that logically must have happened long before Los Angeles, and see that these are the kinds of things you yourself will have to do, from now on, to “touch the diamond world”: to see emptiness directly.  And I repeat that—until that day—your life will be nothing but sadness, getting older, facing death, losing your friends and family and everything you have worked to own; unavoidably, inevitably.

You have a choice, and only this is it.

And so under the influence of everything that had gone before, suddenly I realized that I was not watching a pot of almost-boiling water on the stove.  I suddenly realized that our eyes cannot even see a pot of water.

Honestly I don’t know how it all works, but I do have this mental picture of my two eyeballs.  At the back of each ball, on the inside, the science teacher in my elementary school said that there are special cells—photosensitive cells.

When I look at a pot on the stove—my culture says—light reflects off the metal of the silver-colored pot and the plastic of the black plastic handle, sending pictures towards my eyes, which are detected as the cells at the back of my eyeball are struck by the light.  The cells as a group assume the outline and color of the pieces of the pot that appear to them, turning straight & black, or silver & circular.  And then, according to science, there is some back-and-forth communication with the brain:

“Hey brain, we got some shapes & colors out here!”

“Really?  Tell me what you got.”

“Two things here.  A silver circle, and then a straight black bar.”

“Ah,” says brain.  “Is Mike standing in front of the stove?  Is it Rinpoche’s tea time?”

“Exactly!”

“Well then, that’s a pot of water, just about to boil!  The silver circle is the metal pot, and the straight black line is the pot handle.”

But suddenly I saw that this isn’t quite the way it works.  Suddenly I was focusing somewhere towards the back of my head, and I saw mental pictures coming up there.  They came out of nowhere, but it felt like they were coming out of a place inside the back of my head.

The way I’ve described these images in the 50 years since is that they were luminous, meaning that they were giving off their own light, very much like the neon light on the front of a store announcing its name at nighttime.  They were perfect little luminous pots, there in the back of my head, and they were moving.

Slowly, almost gracefully, they traveled straight across my head to my forehead, to a spot between my eyebrows but further up, and then passed out of my head and down to the silver circle and black bar down on the stove.

I like to say that—in that moment—this procession of images began to settle down, one after another, on the silver and black out there on the stove.  The ancient Buddhist books say that this is happening at an incredible speed: 65 full pot images per millisecond proceeding out of the forehead and “landing” on the silver and the black.  This is, for example, just about the speed of the flow of sequential images in a decent film clip online.

When I try to describe this to my friends, I like to use the illustration of a bowl of ice cream.  Picture a bowl and inside of it say three balls of vanilla ice cream.  These balls are the individual parts of the pot on the stove: silver circles, black bar.

Complete pot images floating out from the spot at the center of our forehead then are like chocolate sauce: they continue on out and down towards the parts on the stove, and then settle atop them—unifying them into the impression of a pot on the stove.


Functionality

I can just feel you flinching a bit at that “impression of a pot” wording.  There’s a part of your mind that jumps up immediately and says “That’s not just an impression of a pot on the stove!  It’s a real pot on the stove!  The fact that you can boil water inside of it proves it’s a real pot on the stove!”

Alright alright, calm down and listen.  The way your mind, and my mind, work is that it automatically builds and maintains a cause-and-effect connection between the fire of the stove, and the boiling of the water here.  We all believe—we deeply and almost unchangeably believe—that the fire on the stove is causing the water to heat up and then boil.  And then the pot is helping to keep all this water contained in one place, and its metal is transfering the heat through to the water.

None of this functionality would be possible if the pot on the stove were just a potpourri of mental pictures.

But consider a different option here.  You don’t have to believe it yet, just consider it.  And then make a resolution to think about it in the days and months ahead.  Your life depends on it.

Suppose that it is not the fire below the pot that is heating it—and the water inside it—up to boiling.  Suppose that as minutes go by after you thought you turned on the stove, additional luminous mental images are floating across your head and out into the world before you.  Suppose that the boiling of the water is actually coming not from the fire below the pot, but actually consists of a coherent series of lightning-fast mental images proceeding from your own mind, out into the world.

Again, this is not an idea that you are required to subscribe to right away.  It’s just a proposal.  An intelligent person would listen carefully to the proposal, and then set about either proving or disproving it to themselves.  Especially if their life were at stake.

To summarize: cause & effect does indeed exist.  It just doesn’t work at all the way we always thought it did.  Any thinking person now would ask themselves, “Well, alright.  Suppose that’s all true.  Can you explain though where all these ‘pictures’ pop out of, when they show up in the back of my mind?  Is there any logic to the way it all works?”


Mental seeds

Our discussion here takes a major and life-saving turn into the question of karma.  The word is much abused in our modern world; but don’t worry much.  The poor word has been abused just about everwhere, forever.  So what does the word “karma” really mean?

A popular alternative word for “karma” in the ancient Buddhist scriptures is simply “mental seed.”  The expression “mental seed” is free of the many strange ideas that surround the word “karma”—and so that’s what we’re going to use in this essay.

And here’s exactly what we mean when we say, “mental seed.”  Suppose your neighbor is having a group of friends over, to celebrate her husband’s birthday.  She has planned a pretty fancy menu with a whole selection of different dishes.

Halfway through the cooking, she realizes that she has run out of pots to use, if she wants to make everything she was planning.
She rushes over to your house, where you too just happen to be preparing a big dinner to celebrate your parents’ wedding anniversary.  You have plans for each one of your kitchen pots today, but then here all of a sudden is your neighbor, begging to use one of them.

You really want to help her, so mentally you rearrange the meal you were planning to make, so that you can loan her the pot she needs to make her birthday celebration successful.

The strength of your willingness to help your neighbor makes an imprint on your mind, very similar to the imprint you might make with your thumb while pressing some clay into the shape of a coffee cup you are making in a pottery class.  Your willingness to help  another person crystallizes this imprint into a mental seed.

At this point, if you really want to understand what’s going on, you need to refer back through the great books of Eastern thinking to a particular teaching about the three types of changing things in the universe.

Anything in the universe that changes changes because the influences that set it into motion—the main causes (think tree seed) and the contributing factors (think soil, water, fertilizer, and sunlight)—pushed it into being with a certain amount of force, and that force as time goes on inevitably wears out.

Think now of one billiard ball struck by another: the second ball starts off across the billiard table, gradually slowing down because of the friction of the table surface and the surrounding air, finally coming to a stop.

Seeds inevitably act just the same.  Once they push out a sprout, they gradually lose their power as the sprout grows towards the sky, turning into a tall tree.  Which is to say, every tree that was ever planted on this entire planet started upwards and then eventually slowed down; stopped growing; and then in time finally fell lifeless to the earth.  The same with every baby who stood up on his or her legs, and in time laid back down dead on the surface of the planet.

Let’s get back to the seed you planted when you loaned the pot you actually needed yourself to your neighbor instead.  Your intention here was a good intention, and a good intention influences how your new mental seed eventually grows: sooner or later, it will sprout into a pot that you find very useful at the moment.

Here’s the exciting part.  It’s easy to go around saying that you get what you give, and that whatever you do—good or bad—to another person turns around and comes back to you.  If we all really believed in that enough to act upon it day to day, the world might finally become a completely sweet and peaceful place.  The reason we all don’t believe in this idea though is that no one has ever explained it to us in a way that we can really believe, and follow, in our daily life.

Well, that changes now.

When you do decide and then actually act to give something to someone else that you actually need for yourself—that last cooking pot—factors like your understanding of how the process works and the strength of your desire to help the other person help place a powerful imprint in your mind: a karmic seed.

Here in our discussion so far, we’ve actually already met the three different types of changing things in the universe.  First there is any physical object in the world that has grown through main causes and contributing factors: think of the tree, growing from the main cause of a seed and depending for its health on contributing factors like sunlight, soil, fertilizer, and the rest.

Secondly there are mental events, which grow and then fade as their inner causes wax and then wane: we read the essay, we suddenly understand how karma really works, and then unless we reinforce that understanding we get busy thinking about other things and gradually forget about the whole thing—and go back to our inexorably crumbling human existence.

Third though we have this almost unnoticed, all-powerful category of the seeds in our mind: karmic seeds, from doing something nice or not so nice to another person.  These live in our mind, but they are not made of mind.  This is because “mind” is defined by knowing, by being aware; and these seeds are not things that are aware.  They don’t think, they don’t know—even though their residence is the mind.

Karmic seeds then have no physical parameters: no color, no shape, no particular length or width.  Nor do they have mental parameters, thinking this or feeling that.  They are pure potential—pure “maybe this will happen”—and this means we will never be able to observe them through physical means.  But you don’t have to crawl under your kitchen sink to see, with absolute certainty, that a pipe there is leaking; you have a puddle that the leak created, right there in the middle of the kitchen floor, to prove the existence of the unseen leak.

Karmic seeds then are the ones invisibly spewing out those pot-on-the-stove images that pop into the back of Mike’s mind as he’s waiting for Rinpoche’s tea water to boil; the luminous images that float to the forehead and then out on the stove.  As the sutras aptly put it, “The entire world, and everything within it, is a production of karma: of how we have treated others before.”


Dependent events

According to these same holy books, the entire universe divides into two different kinds of things: emptiness, and dependence.  The fact of dependence—the fact that the entire universe rests upon our inner karmic seeds—is the one that you finally confirm, after living for countless billions of years throughout every possible corner of this universe, on the day you yourself have your own version of the “pot on the stove experience.”

Like emptiness and karma and the four “noble” truths, the grand principle of dependence has been mangled in translation.  We often hear in early Western translations of the Asian classics the term “dependent origination,” which has no real practical meaning to a normal person and just about guarantees the death of one of the only ideas that can save our life.

The common Asian translation here of “cause & effect” is somewhat better, but still wanting.  We personally prefer “dependent events.”  This is because of the deeper meaning of the original Sanskrit: pratitya samutpada (technical spelling pratītya samutpāda), or “events occurring through a dependent connection.”

That is, we have to remember that if we’re out to explain why the whole universe happens in the first place, we need to explain not only things that have happened because of causes (“grew”), but also things that have happened but which did not have causes (“happened, but not because they grew”).  Both can be referred to as events that occur; both are real; and the universe is made of both.

For an example of things that have happened because of causes, we have only to go so far as that tree we were talking about.  But there are also things that happen but which don’t have formal causes.  One of the most famous of these is anything which exists, but which exists as a simple absence.

This doesn’t have to be as complicated as it sounds.  You had a mouse in your kitchen, and your wife is one of the smart, compassionate types who realizes that a small live trap is just as good as mouse poison.  She set the (inexpensive, always-works) live trap out in the middle of the kitchen floor last night, and boom there it is this morning, with a frisky happy little mouse in it.  You even have fun taking the kids out in a meadow on the outskirts of town and dropping off the mouse—alive—to enjoy the rest of his life.  (A great life-example for the kids as well.)

In the moment that you and the kids passed through the kitchen door with the trap and its mouse in your hands, an absence came into being, there in the kitchen.  That absence (of a mouse in the kitchen) is a real thing, and it manifests as the end of mouse poop and late-night scurrying noises in your kitchen.

But that absence was not a changing entity, exhibiting the constant fluctuation say of a tree growing through its constant changes.  Mice are either there in your kitchen, or they are not: it’s an on/off sort of situation.  The lack of mice in your kitchen had a first moment of existence, and it will probably some day have a last moment of existence (when another mouse discovers your kitchen), but it didn’t gradually start up nor will it gradually wind down, the way any caused or grown sort of existence does.

The reason we mention this is so that you can appreciate that there are two kinds of events in your world: those that grow, and those that don’t, but which do really come into existence without the gradual expansion implied by the word “growing.”  And sooner or later you will have to come to the realization that both types of existing things were brought into existence by those luminous mental pictures.

Bottom line, mental pictures are responsible for everything in the universe—in your universe.  If there are two great principles behind your whole universe—dependence, and emptiness—then the early morning of the day you see emptiness directly is a time to see the first: the pot on the stove.  And then later in the same morning you will see emptiness directly, and that’s a whole different thing.


Details of the second path

We would be remiss here if we didn’t fit this pot-on-the-stove experience into the structure of the five-path flow which is so crucial to ancient Buddhist literature.  Remember, this is different from the concept of the four truths and their 16 aspects, or “moments”—which we’ll get back to after that.

We’ve seen that the second of the five paths is the “path of preparation,” during which we are preparing to see emptiness directly.  I personally would say that—for me—this path began during my formal studies, especially in the Himalayas, triggered by the first path of sadness about my mother’s illness and approaching death.

Scripturally, this second path is divided into four stages, differentiated by deepening understandings about the nature of subjects and objects of perception.  These four stages are named Warmth, Peak, Mastery, and Highest Thing Of All.  Warmth and Peak are said to represent insights into objects, and then Mastery and Highest Thing of All consist of insights into the subjects that hold such objects.

In my personal experience, I would say that Warmth and Peak occurred during my deepening understanding of that chi-jedrak: quality & characteristic.  Mastery occurred during the weeks of transition to the pot-on-the-stove experience; and it’s important to note here that, according to scripture, one can no longer be born into a lower realm (hell, craving spirits, animals) once they have reached Mastery.

From where you’re sitting right now as you read these words, it may not seem crucial or crucially interesting that you could reach a sort of spiritual “guarantee” that you would never again suffer greatly after death.  Believe me, this blasé attitude will disappear when you get close to my age!  Why not take care of this sort of thing while you are still relatively young?  Then you don’t have to worry!

The experience of the pot on the stove is, without doubt, the “Highest Thing of All” stage described in scripture for the end of the second path.  The ancient books are quick to point out that, yes, the direct experience of emptiness is itself the real highest thing of all—but the breakthrough of observing those mental images directly, for the first time, is the very “highest thing of all” in the normal world, the world of pain without hope.


A note on words
and a middle way

As you read through the ultimately detailed presentation on emptiness offered by Masters Nagarjuna, Chandrakirti, and Tsongkapa below, you will often come across wording that describes how things exist as nothing more than “labeled with names” or words.  Many of the many proofs in our opus here depend on this turn of phrase, so it’s important—I think—to identify its place here in the actual experience of emptiness.

It’s absolutely crucial here to understand that terms like “names” or “labels” or even “words” itself all refer to the luminous mental images that we just talked about.  In this context, the word “name” itself is an abbreviation for “luminous mental picture”: more of an image, then a verbalization.

From here then it’s easy to see what “merely a creation of names” is referring to in middle way philosophy: all the pots and other things we ever experience are composites of those luminous images coming out of the karmic seeds inside our own mind.  We ourselves are literally creating our world, as we behave with kindness or meanness to our fellow living beings.

From this understanding, it’s completely easy to slip into understanding the real meaning of the famous expression “middle way” itself.  From one point of view (I personally would say from the “capitals” point of view, Middle Way, or Madhyamika) this phrase refers to a highly developed philosophical school in late medieval India.  This is in fact the school that we are seeing explained here in our text, and explains even its base title: “Entering the Middle Way.”

But from a grander point of view, “middle way” is a way of looking at our world free of two extremes of opinion—which puts it in the middle.  And the pot on the stove experience gives us an unerring reference point to understand this “middle.”

The first extreme would be to believe that the pot on the stove exists the way we always assumed it did: out there, on its own, appearing to us because we took it out of the cabinet.  This “object-ive” view of reality—by the way—is the one that most of science is based upon.  And the fallacies contained in this view are the reason why science has yet to lead to human happiness.

The second extreme would be to say that—if the pot didn’t exist the way we always thought it did, in some objective way—then the pot couldn’t exist at all.  This second opinion carries all the baggage of beliefs that nothing is real; nothing really exists; it doesn’t matter how we treat other people; it doesn’t matter what we do with our life.

The middle way between these two mistaken opinions is the realization that the pot on the stove is coming from me: from the way I shared, or refused to share, my pots in the past—and planted corresponding seeds for luminous pictures, or reality itself.


Assigning moments
to the pot on the stove

And so it’s finally come time for us to assign one or more of the 16 moments of the four higher truths to our “pot on the stove” experience.  Again I believe this assignment is in some ways subjective, but again because of my unique personal experience I’m not aware of another person in this world at this moment who could make the assignment with more authority.

First I would assign [8] the moment of “factor” (pratyaya in the Sanskrit) to the luminous pictures which emerge from karmic seeds in our minds and compose every object in our world, changing or unchanging.  Again, “factors” in this sense subsume all the words in the world; and as a side note I would say that languages such as Chinese, where the pictures and words are combined, would have certain specific advantages here, for communication.

Secondly I would say that [5] the moment of the “source” of suffering consists of the fact that it is the negative mental seeds especially which produce our repeated personal existence of death and pain.  Implicit here is the fact that all the trouble that ever comes to each one of us—and repeated death itself—is all something that each one of us has created for ourselves by ourselves: it is impossible to blame another living being for anything negative that ever happens to us.

We do though have some good news happening here at the second path, and this is that we have started the process of eliminating our suffering, forever.  Because of our direct experience of the mental seeds and luminous pictures, all seeds that could create for us the image of a lower rebirth have been prevented or “spoiled”: we may still have some from before, but they are like ruined flower seeds that will never produce a plant in our garden.  As such, we have here our first steps of moment [9] the end of pain (nirodha in the Sanskrit).



Group Four:
Touching the diamond

The emptiness of things, and me

Just a side note.  The time period between seeing the pot on the stove, and the direct perception of emptiness, is a particularly intriguing subject for me.  I don’t remember a lot of details, but I know that after all those once-in-a-lifetime realizations about the luminous mental images, I did finish making that cup of tea for Rinpoche, and took it to his room for him.

Perhaps I took care of some other responsibilities after that, but the bottom line is that I ended up in the temple, on a meditation cushion on the floor, ready for my daily practice.  I believe that it is inevitable that a person who personally witnesses luminous images in action will—within a few hours—sit down in deep meditation and see emptiness directly.  

I have the strong conviction that the two events always happen, for every person in history, within a few hours of each other.  I have often reflected that those few hours are a unique period in the billions of years of a person’s life; they cannot die, I believe, during those hours, which cannot be said of any other hours among those billions of years.  And they cannot be distracted from the coming vision, by any circumstance in this entire universe.

So here is what actually happens when you see emptiness directly.

I sat down to meditate on the right side of the Mongolian temple, back towards the double doors leading to the front foyer; it is no exaggeration to say that the temple—because of what happened there that day—is a holy place, and a great place to stop by yourself someday and get some personal blessing from it.  (It’s called Rashi Gempil Ling Buddhist Temple, and is found on 5th Street in Howell, New Jersey).

I remember a distinct impression of rising up physically to a certain level of meditation, the one I mentioned earlier, almost as if I were in an elevator.  I have not typically had this sensation in my meditations either before or after that day.

And then I went into emptiness.

There’s a whole lot to say about how you can’t say anything about the actual experience.  When you go through the experience of the pot on the stove, your mind is in a discursive mode—which more or less means that you are still having your normal mental conversation with yourself, the whole time.  That also implies, naturally, that you would have quite a bit to say about what happened to you at the time.

According to the scriptures, there is a difference in the general class of object we are focusing upon during the two experiences.  During the pot on the stove, we are—naturally—focused on this object (or another one like it; but don’t forget that it’s significant that the object in this case was being used to serve a cup of tea to an extraordinary teacher who was daily explaining these things to people).  It’s important to say that by implication we are understanding, if not immersed in, at that moment a sort of emptiness as well: the emptiness of a metal pot on the stove.

When we say “emptiness” in this case, it’s crucial that you appreciate that we are not talking about some mystic space or something.  It’s a very simple and specific absence of something that we always thought was there: a pot that existed out there on the stove that was coming from its own side; a pot that was created in a factory somewhere and ended up in this particular kitchen.

In fact, ancient Buddhist scripture has a special word for people who have not seen emptiness—for the opposite of an arya, a “higher being.”  This term is tsur-tong (technical spelling tsur-mthong), which literally means “people who see things as coming this way,” towards them.  And of course when we ourselves have that “pot on the stove” experience, just before we see emptiness directly we are realizing that things come from us: that they are composites of those luminous mental images popping out of our mental seeds and flying out to create the pot in front of us.

Scripture further says that there is a crucial difference in the object of the two experiences; and we have this and other additional formal insights in that scripture simply because there have been countless individuals in this entire universe who saw emptiness directly long before I did, and who then continued on to the higher levels that we will talk about below, including total enlightenment.

And they have left us records of levels that I myself will not reach for some time; although it should be said here that the direct experience of emptiness by an arya on the first day of their aryaship is qualitatively said to be no different, in any respect, from the direct experience of emptiness on a constant basis by an enlightened being.  And so it can be difficult to find a good description of these higher levels that we will all eventually go through; the latter part of the commentary by Je Tsongkapa here is a classic source.

The bottom line is that the experience of “the pot on the stove” will typically be directed at some object in our life, such as that pot; whereas the first direct experience of emptiness in that deep state of meditation is tied up with our perception of myself—in my case, of Michael.

What’s ironic about the length of the direct perception though is that we cannot be aware of ourselves during that time.  You see, emptiness is an absence of something: it is the fact that something is not there.  It’s not easy, but conceptually—long in advance—you have to get used to the idea that you will not be seeing something: it’s not as if emptiness is like a pot or like darkness at night or unconsciousness when you get knocked out in an accident, or under anesthesia during an operation at the hospital.

Rather, emptiness is the absence of something that you thought was there; that you expected to be there.  A good friend invites you out to dinner at a nice restaurant and then when you show up on time, there is an “absence of friend” present there at the restaurant because there was a bad accident uptown, and your friend is still stuck there in a cab.

The friend, by the way, is real; and the fact of the friend not being in the restaurant at the appointed hour is just as real.

In our case here though—by the way—what we perceive during our deep meditation as something missing is something that could never have been there in the first place: Michael the Meditator who was not a composite of luminous pictures coming from the karmic seeds inside of Michael’s mind.

Experientally (and, after all, that is the priceless value of this account), we drop into the perception of an absence of a Michael who was never possible; except that in the hour that you yourself reach this perception, it will be the absence of the you who was never possible.

Again, you can have no other thoughts or perceptions for the length of this communion with ultimate reality.  You cannot be aware of yourself, because you are not emptiness: you are not ultimate reality.  You cannot be aware of how much time has passed inside of the direct perception, because time itself is not emptiness: it is not ultimate reality.

When you look back at the time you spent in this direct communion with ultimate reality, you might even feel cheated in a way.  There you were, but there was no way you could tell you were there—no way to exult inside and say, “I did it!!”  Perceiving at that time anything other than emptiness would force you out of your emptiness realization.

You did know though roughly what time you sat down to meditate, and naturally when you come out one of the first things you do is to look at the clock, to see how long you were “under.”  In my case, it was about 20 minutes, and I believe this is typical for the first direct perception of emptiness.

People have asked me if I have seen emptiness directly again during these last 50 years, and I can honestly answer “No, I haven’t!”  I admit that there have probably been months or years during this period when my meditation was not well maintained enough to reach the necessary platform to see emptiness directly.

But I do think—looking back with a half century of intense scripture study and thought under my belt—that the seeds to go into the direct perception of emptiness are simply too karmically “expensive” for a new arya to have a repeat experience of it even within decades.  We have already discussed the presumptive many past lifetimes of work I put in well before my birth into this life, and if we consider those as part of the prerequisites for the one experience in this present lifetime, we can appreciate that the direct perception may be much more rare than we ever imagined.


Assigning moments
to the direct experience

You may have noticed that the moments or aspects among the 16 that we’ve mentioned so far were heavily bunched into the first two arya truths: pain, and the cause of pain.  If you think about it, this is natural for a person who is trying to pull themselves out of the world of inevitable death.  We see what’s wrong, and then we try to find out how to stop it.

I would say that this one day on which you first spot luminous images and then go on to touch the diamond world—or emptiness—directly corresponds to aspect [9], which is itself called “the end” (nirodha in the Sanskrit).

Scripture says that we can treat “ending” here in two distinctly different ways.

The first, obviously, is the end of pain; for the day that we first see emptiness directly is the first day of what is known as “entering the stream.”  Here I always think of a Jackie Chan movie where he’s of course in a kung-fu fight with a bad guy, but the heroine is glued to a conveyor belt inexorably headed into a bunch of huge blades that are going to chop her into little pieces, if Jackie can’t get her off quick!

Except in this case, the inexorable belt is headed towards nirvana and enlightenment, and there is nothing that can prevent it.  Once we go through those 20 minutes of seeing emptiness directly, we are headed in a very short, fixed time to the end of all suffering and death.  And there is no force in the universe that can stop us: not even a fully enlightened Buddha could do so, even supposing they would ever want to.  Imagine how that feels!

There is a deeper ending here, which is the absence of all wrong ideas about where things are coming from, particularly myself.  It’s as if after seeing that the pot on the stove is made of layers of luminous images, all the other parts of the stove—the ones that are coming from their own side—suddenly just drop away.

The absence of these parts of the pot, and myself, that were never there in the first place is exactly what emptiness really is.  When our understanding reaches this point, we are finally beyond any of those strange ideas—which have covered whole countries in centuries past—which say that emptiness means sitting absolutely unmoving in front of a wall and trying to empty the mind; to think about nothing.

In a moral sense too this improved version of emptiness makes a lot more sense.  If the meaning of emptiness is that nothing really exists, or that nothing really matters or that there is no good or evil, every one of us feels deep down inside that something is missing—something must be wrong.

But if emptiness means that there is nothing that doesn’t come from luminous images flying out of karmic seeds in my mind, then that automatically implies that there is a moral basis to everything in the universe.  People who are generous with their pots always have pots, and people who steal pots from others—as these seeds ripen—never have the things they need or want.

And when people finally figure out (as they must eventually do, for after all we are all thinking creatures) that this is the way the universe works, then the world will become a place filled with moral and generous people.


Diamonds:
the perfect metaphor

Any person who goes through those 20 minutes in the direct perception of emptiness goes through another experience just after they come down out of this perception.  Sitting on our meditation cushion after that life-changing experience, we are aware for the first time that the entire universe is composed of two different “layers” of reality.

That is, we now know that there is a “higher” reality—the sheer emptiness of anything not coming from my luminous images—that is present here in every nook and corner of where we ourselves live.  And then there is the “apparent” reality that we’ve always walked through; apparent, because it seems to come from its side, and not from mine.  Sometimes this second level of reality is called “deceptive” reality, since it tends to “trick” us about where things are coming from—like kitchen pot factories or appliance stores, and not from supplying a pot to a neighbor who really needs one today.

And so now we are sure—for the first time in our life—that there really is a higher reality.  We also know, instinctively, that we won’t be able to get back to it anytime soon: the seeds that projected those 20 minutes were just too expensive, and rare—accumulated probably over many lifetimes of effort.

And so every “new” arya sitting on their meditation cushion just after the grand vision immediately begins working on this specific problem in their life: “How am I going to remember what I just saw?  Is there any object here in the normal world that I could keep close to me, to forever remind me of what I saw?  For this memory to fade would be the greatest disaster in a human life.”

Our mind searches the old familiar universe we grew up in, and for every single new arya in the history of the universe, it comes to the diamond.  And why is that?

You see, in those sort of frantic moments grasping for some way to remember, we are casting about for something which is the most of anything: the highest of anything, just like the ultimate reality of emptiness which we just came out of.  And what we realize in the opening minutes of this search is that there is nothing which is the most or the highest of anything, here in the universe.

That is, there is no longest thing in the world: you can always add another inch.  There is no shortest thing in the world: if something has any width at all, you can therefore divide it in half.  No hottest thing, no coldest thing, no farthest thing, no nearest thing.  You get the picture.  But we desperately need to find something here in the normal world which is ultimate, just the way the emptiness that we saw was.

And every human mind at this point will come up with the diamond.  I want to emphasize here that before those minutes, I had no particular interest in diamonds, and no particular knowledge of them either.  I knew that when a woman got engaged to be married in my culture, their fiancé often bought them a ring that had a diamond in it; my general impression was that this was because diamonds were really hard and didn’t break easily, and were also really beautiful, so this was a nice symbol that the coming marriage would be happy and long-lived.

I also knew that raw diamond crystals came deep out of mines somewhere—Africa was a common location, I knew—but I had never seen or touched a diamond crystal, and again had no particular interest in them.

But suddenly, having come down out of emptiness, I knew that diamond was the one object in this reality that best represented this higher reality.  Diamond is the hardest commonly available, naturally occurring substance in the universe, and under normal circumstances nothing can cut it.

I remember that in the years following my experience sitting in the Mongolian temple, I was asked by my teacher to organize educational classes for the young Mongols in the neighborhood.  After reading Buddhist stories in the temple or acting them out in little drama plays there, the kids would clamber into the tiny church kitchen for snacks.

By that time, I had a small raw diamond crystal that I would keep in a little “spring ring” that you could open or close with a press of the fingers.  I showed it to some of the kids and then got distracted getting their refreshments ready.  By the time I turned back around, they had discovered that the diamond was so hard that they could easily write their names on the temple kitchen window glass.  I remember that Khen Rinpoche gave me an earful and how the names stayed there for many years, since we were  in no mood—or finances—to replace the panes of glass.

Aside from being just about the hardest thing in the universe, diamonds are also perfectly transparent.  If you and I were sitting on chairs facing each other and there was a thick wall of pure diamond between us—and if no other source of light were reflecting on the wall—then it would be perfectly invisible to the both of us.

This also fit the ultimate reality of emptiness; every room that you and I have ever sat in has had examples of emptiness all around it: the emptiness of the chair, emptiness of the table, emptiness of the people sitting at the table.  We are—all day long—literally surrounded by examples of this highest reality, which could save our lives if we only saw it once.  And yet without special training and preparation, it is normally entirely invisible to us.

The third quality of diamond that was important to me at that moment was that every diamond in the entire universe is equally pure, with the exact same atomic structure.  This was not something I knew from study at that moment, but something I knew about diamond by instinct.  In a similar way, every object in the universe has its own emptiness, absolutely pure and absolutely equal.

And so some of my first thoughts while sitting there, fresh out of the direct perception of emptiness, were that I should try to obtain a diamond that could remind me of what I had seen; and that for the rest of my life I should try to be around diamonds as much as I could.

As for the 16 moments of the four higher truths, I would assign this experience of the diamond to [11] “beauty” (which is pranita in the Sanskrit).  This is one of the four aspects of the truth of the end of suffering; and end which is triggered by our direct perception of the emptiness which the diamond represents.  And, ultimately, the end of pain is as beautiful as a fine diamond.

There is sort of footnote here, a discrete realization towards the end.  This is where the newborn arya realizes, very clearly, that the diamond as a metaphor for emptiness is the closest thing in normal reality to emptiness, but at the same time not very close at all!  It’s like diamond is there at the top of a ladder but emptiness is a million miles further, somewhere near the next galaxy out.

Years later, in addition to the massive diamond jewelry company I will describe below, I started a smaller diamond company on my own.  When I was trying to think of a name for the firm, I came up with “Near Diamonds” to try to remember this particular realization from my “diamond day.”  But I thought the name might lead to some confusion (“What? Do they only sell fake diamonds?”) and in the end, I went with “Hancock Diamonds,” since this is my wife Veronica’s maiden name, and means a lot to me.

By the way, I firmly belief that this “close but not quite” aspect of diamonds is responsible for the name of the oldest printed book in the world, and perhaps the one book most published ever in the history of this world.  This is the famous Diamond Cutter Sutra.  

Nowhere in the entire book is diamond mentioned, not even once.  And despite the fact that the book has been mis-named “The Diamond Sutra” in different generations and countries throughout history, the original title is indisputably Vajra Chedika Sutra (technical spelling Vajracchedikā Sūtra), or The Diamond Cutter.  Now how did it get a name like that?  And what diamond is being cut?



Group Five:
The immediate aftermath

A real prostration

Eventually I stood up from my meditation cushion, and began walking towards the front of the temple.  Buddhists, from the time they are kids, are trained to walk around temples and similar holy places in a clockwise direction; and so I headed kitty-corner towards the northwestern side of the altar.

As I walked, I was looking ahead towards the massive altar that covered the whole front of the temple.  I remember the first time I laid eyes on this altar.  Remember, I had come to the temple direct from Princeton, where I had been serving as an acolyte (or altar boy) in the Princeton University Chapel, a massive gothic cathedral all carved stone and stained glass, nearly 100 feet high.  A completely silent and somber space.

Our Mongol temple was the complete opposite.  The walls were literally covered with paintings and hangings of a wild assortment of Buddhist angel and deities, with terrifying depictions of the realms of hell sprinkled almost randomly among them.  The altar was wildly populated by random statues of every Buddha you could imagine, made of every material you could imagine, dressed in every color of cloth you could imagine, with a range of artistry from classical to folk Buddhas that looked as though a child had made them at first grade in school.

I later learned that most of these images had been housed in small village temples in Kalmykia, the Mongol outpost near southern Russia.  When the Nazis came through, frightened villagers grabbed every image they could, threw it in the back of a horse wagon, and ran.  And so they had ended up here in New Jersey, along with the refugees.

It took me years to make the adjustment from the Princeton Cathedral to chaos of the Mongolian sacred space, and I had frankly been very Princetonly judgemental of the arrangements there.

But today, still under the influence of the communion with emptiness (as I was, indeed, for the entire rest of the day), I suddenly had a realization about all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas painted and sculpted here.  The very smallest, plainest, homely clay Buddha image had been fashioned by someone who had seen another image before that.  And that image, in turn, had been crafted by another person who had laid eyes on an earlier image, and so on inexorably from some very first Buddha image made by an individual who had themselves seen the Buddha in person.  

Suddenly I realized that the most simple image among this chaos of images was a direct line to an enlightened being—and a being who had once seen, for their first time, the very same emptiness I had seen for myself today, and thus entered the stream ending in Buddhahood.

And with that realization, I suddenly knew that I had to throw myself down on the floor in reverence before this evidence of enlightenment.  Us Buddhists are taught by our teachers that when we meet with an image of Lord Buddha—or any other Buddha—we should join our palms, and bow in respect.  In special circumstances, we are encouraged to do a formal prostration, most often on our hands and knees.

But today I knew that to truly pay worthy respect, I should throw myself flat on the floor, face in the floor, to everyone in this little crowd of Buddhas.  It felt very right, and I stayed there like that, silent and happy, for quite some time.  The seeds we plant with heartfelt respect of the teachings and teachings is a form of that aspect [15], the “means” to the end of pain.

Then I was drawn to sit for meditation once more—this time on the near side, the south side, of the benches used by the monks during ceremonies at the temple.


Walking the planets

Here I went into meditation; I don’t think I had a meditation cushion ready, but we had a pretty cozy carpet on the floor, that Rinpoche and I had picked out—wildly multicolored on purpose, to hide the inevitable butter lamp stains that you find all over the floor at every such temple.

I went pretty deep pretty fast, and inwardly I was “looking” straight ahead.

Suddenly a figure formed in front of me: it was my Mom, alive, looking young and pretty as I remembered her from my childhood.  She wasn’t sitting in meditation, but she was seated on the floor in front of me, slightly elevated.  She looked as though she was in some kind of cave with soft lighting.  I was looking straight into her face, and she had that look you see in a person who is troubled by something, and you can tell.

In my heart, I knew she was thinking about life: about the pain of life, both her own and that of her boys and everyone else she cared for.  And I knew that it was deeply troubling her.

Suddenly I knew that—in no small part because of my experience that day already—I could help her with her problem, help her in an ultimate way.  I could help her overcome death forever, and the death of all those dear to her.  I was on my way, I was already in the stream, it would not be long now.

And this I told her: “Mom, I know what’s worrying you; death, and pain for all whom you and I love, inevitable in this life.  But it can be stopped, it can be prevented.  And earlier today something happened to me that’s going to make it possible for me to help you, and everybody else there is.  I am coming, and it won’t be long.  I will help you, I will save you, I will stop your suffering forever.”

My Mom, as any mom would, brightened up immediately with the hope of it.  She smiled to let me know she understood, understood everything.  And then she faded, along with the light grey cave, and then another figure formed there: the image of my Father, also surrounded by soft darkness.

Dad looked the same as Mom had: he was happy to see me, but I could tell that he was very worried about something—about life itself, and his own coming death, and the death of everyone dear to him.  I spoke, in my mind, and gave him the same assurances I had given my Mother: “I am coming; I am near to enlightenment; and when I reach it I will be there to help you.  All will be well.  We will all be happy.”

Dad acknowledged my words, and believed them, and his face brightened in smile.  And then he too faded, to be replaced by my older brother, Geoff.

Geoff had the same troubled look, and I gave him the same assurances, and he left with the same comfort.  One by one, all of my close and more extended family members made their appearance, and left with the same quiet happiness.

And then came all of our neighbors back home, only a small number of them known to me by name—but receiving from me the same promise, and the same comfort.

Then came—still individually, still one by one—all the people in my city back home; and then all the people in the next city over; and all those in the next cities, until I had personally met each individual, people of all ages and backgrounds, from coast to coast in my home country.

Then came all the people in other countries, until I had met and assured every single individual living in our entire world.

And then something wonderful happened: our family dog George, who I think had passed away by that time, appeared before me, young and frisky and happy to receive my assurances.  George was followed by all the dear pets of people all over our neighborhood, and our entire city, and then gradually all of the pets in the world, friends of the world’s humans.  Each of the animals could understand what I told them, and each one left reassured.

Then began an incredible parade of every individual animal upon this entire planet, billions upon billions of them, from massive sea whales down to individual microbes.  I met each one with their own personality, and gave each one my assurances.

How much time did I spend meeting these billions upon billions of living creatures, individually, and assuring them—individually?  The subjective passage of time for me was somewhere in the vicinity of a half hour to an hour.  In the years since then, I have felt some attraction to studying the theories of the relativity (bendability) of time and space described by Albert Einstein and his fellow physicists, starting from the simple proof of these ideas they derived from observing the way in which the planet Mercury transits or passes out from behind the Sun, and the light reflected from it is bent and slowed by the Sun’s gravity on its way to us—thus effectively slowing down time itself.

We know then that time can slow or speed up; in a way we knew this from how minutes pass faster or slower as we spend time with those we love, or in the dentist’s chair.  And so even just scientifically and through personal experience, we feel that the speed of the passage of time can be manipulated.

In my case I had enough time after all that I’ve described above to undertake offering the same sorts of assurances to people and animals on other planets—in fact, upon every planet in the universe: every planet that exists.  Buddhism for example asserts that the physical universe has no outer boundary, which means that there is no end to the number of planets around us, and thus no end to the number of living beings around us.

At the same time, Buddhism asserts that a person under these special circumstances—under the influence of these unique realizations, which are considered a separate sort of consciousness altogether—can and does meet every living being in existence, to deliver them comfort.

Technically speaking, the scriptures describe the experience that I went through in those minutes as reaching a universal attitude of love known as bodhichitta, or the Wish to help all living beings become enlightened.  A person who has had this experience thereby becomes a genuine bodhisattva—and this is the true meaning of the term.

Thus we can describe a single person who has had both the direct experience of emptiness and of this universal emotion of love as a bodhisattva arya.

Personally I would categorize this last experience as aspect or moment [10]—a step in the truth of the end of suffering—which goes by the name of “peace” (shanta in the original Sanskrit).


The books are true,
and must be saved

I remember standing up then and walking past the altar down to the northeast corner of the temple: towards the side door.  Here I was close to one part of the Kangyur collection of ancient books that our temple held.

Long before my own arrival, a very special sponsor had donated to the Temple an extremely rare, woodblock printing of the 100 volumes of this collection, which contains within it all the nearly 1,000 sutras and other teachings of the historical Buddha which survive up to the present time, in Tibetan translation.  These were unbound sheaves wrapped in individual silk covers, bright and beautiful, in individual cubbyholes reaching up to the ceiling of the Temple.

Here I paused, and here I had another wave of realization.  I was now sure—from my own personal experience—that every single sentence contained in these hundred thousand pages or so was completely true.  And in fact, these books and their commentaries (about another 3,700 ancient explanations, along with perhaps several hundred thousand more recent commentaries, in the last thousand years) contained almost everything of true value in this entire world.

Only these books were absolutely true, and absolutely capable of granting to people a life beyond death itself.  If they were ever lost in this world, then it would literally be more serious and irrevocable than if the sun above us had suddenly been snuffed out.

And so suddenly I was very, very sure that during the rest of the years left to me on this planet, I had to—every single day—do everything I could humanly accomplish to make sure that these books survived in this world, and were translated into the modern languages of this world, and spread throughout this world as widely as possible, to every human soul who might possibly be interested to learn about them.

Within the next decade then I had helped start the Asian Classics Input Project (ACIP, since renamed to ALL, or the Asian Legacy Library) with the goal of finding, digitalizing, and making free online copies of all these texts.  I see this as a project that might require the next few hundred years.  I am happy to say that we did succeed in completing—within the first 20 years or so of our work—the searchable digitalization of all the nearly 5,000 works surviving from ancient India, and they are now available without charge online, to the general public.

In the last 10 years, we have further organized the Diamond Cutter Classics non-profit organization dedicated to training young scholars to begin translating these works, and we have already completed thousands of pages of finished publications, including the present volumes.  You can find a list of all the works finished and in progress, at the end of this set of four books.  I am happy to say that in these past decades, we have attracted a wonderful group of supporters from all over the world, to help us make this dream come true.

As for the 16 moments, I would include this realization into [16] “method” (in the Sanskrit, nairyanika), which is the last of the four aspects within the arya truth of the path to the end of suffering.  This is a recognition of the fact that these records of enlightened teaching are almost literally the only thing that can help all human beings on this world to free themselves from pain.


Seven lifetimes to go

In these following minutes, there washed over me several waves of understanding about my own future years.  The most important was that I realized that I would live another seven lifetimes (including this present lifetime as the first) processing what had happened to me, and completing my own journey through the higher levels and on up to Buddhahood itself.

It was several years later that—during my continued studies of Higher Knowledge (Abhidharma) with Khen Rinpoche—I came across a specific description of these same seven lifetimes.  In ancient Tibetan, the arya to live them is referred to as sipa len dunbawa (technical spelling, srid-pa lan bdun-pa-ba): “one with seven suffering lifetimes left to go.”

Now seven lifetimes of suffering, if we take each one at around 70 years, for a total of some 500 more years of pain before our own perfect enlightenment, would naturally seem quite a disaster to most of us.  But an arya, for the first time, perceives exactly how many entire lifetimes of intense pain and sadness they have gone through earlier, up to this point.

And there is no number to describe these lives of pain, for their total sum is beyond any number.  Simple logic, as we mentioned earlier with throwing the two dice, stipulates that this life must have had a life before it which helped determine its details and events: nothing happens from nothing, and no cause can ever engender a dissimilar result.  Lemon seeds don’t grow watermelons.

And so an arya looks back at infinite confirmed instances of pain, and looks ahead to those 500 more years of ever-decreasing pain, and then complete bliss for all the rest of eternity.  Not a bad deal!

I would again classify this particular realization as aspect [10]—“peace”—within the arya truth of the end of suffering.  It is a period of peace knowing that an ultimate peace is coming, soon.


We will all lay down

An arya has a related wave of realization, on that day.  Each and every one of us, at a certain point in our life—usually in childhood, with the death of a member of our extended family—becomes aware of the fact of death, and the presumption that one day we too will have to die.

We know we will have to die some time, and it is human nature at its most fundamental to believe we will not die soon.  Each and every one of us convinces ourselves that—against all history of all time to the contrary—we of all people may not have to die.  Or certainly we each act as though this is our deepest conviction.

An arya—on the day of their aryaship—has a contrary realization.  That is, I saw ahead to the day of my own death, in this present lifetime.  I saw life, for the first time, as a struggle between me and gravity.  And I saw that gravity always wins.

I have grandchildren, new grandchildren, who are just learning to walk.  They are sort of cute because for example they pull themselves up using a nearby bookcase; lean forward; and take off to walk across the floor as they’ve seen parents and grandparents do.

Inevitably they plop down on their bottoms, and in this case the layers of diapers and cloth we have to keep them in turn out to be a godsend, since there’s lots of padding and the sudden seating themselves rarely hurts.  They just crawl over to their hands and knees and try again.

They will achieve locomotion on those two unsteady sticks we call “legs,” and they will walk through life with them.  Comes a day though—inevitably—when some illness or other, or else simple old age and weakness, puts them down flat on their back and they simply cannot get up, or stay up.  A sort of permanent return to infancy.

An arya is suddenly free from that desperate hope to live forever, and sees directly ahead to the day when they too must join the rest of humanity for all of history, and lie down and let gravity cradle them again and take their last breaths.  Of all the people in the world, only an arya sees ahead to the day—seven lifetimes hence—when they will defeat death.  And of all the people in the world, only an arya is absolutely sure when and how they will lie down their last, in this life.

This awareness of their own certain impermanence—and the mission they have inherited to save other people, and save the teachings that save other people—make aryas uniquely sensitive that they only have so many minutes left in this lifetime to do what the whole world needs them to do.  If you ever meet an arya, then keep this in mind and show them some patience when they are in the middle of a life-saving operation on a dying patient—as they are at every minute.

This future-sight of the day they will lay down on the earth in this life I would place in aspect [1], “impermanence,” within the first of the four higher truths: suffering.  It sits side-by-side then—for me—with the tragic death of my Mother.

On a grander level, I would include here in summary 	the realization of an arya that nothing comes from nothing, or leads to nothing: we see that we have lived countles previous lifetimes in pain, before we came here—striving and dying again and again—and unless we do something about it, this will continue.  This we can categorize as aspect [7], “spring” (prabhava in the Sanskrit), within the arya truth of the source of suffering.


I will make progress,
I will be taken care of

During the period that I saw my death, I also saw that I would be reborn, and how that would feel.  This was an experience distinct from the awareness of seven lifetimes to go.

And so I can say that although I have not directly perceived events of my past lives, I have perceived a specific event of my upcoming lifetimes.  I had a very distinct and unexpected perception that in those lifetimes to come, I would take birth in comfortable financial and social circumstances; and that immediately upon my birth, there would be very capable teachers taking care of me, and seeing that I received a training similar to the one I have received in this current lifetime.

All of this relates to a concept called deng (technical spelling gdeng) in the ancient scriptures: a point in our life where we have accumulated such a quantity of positive karmic seeds that it is guaranteed we will be born into happy circumstances in our future lifetimes, and continue to progress upon our spiritual path.  When I really think about it, I realize that I may be the only person alive on this earth who knows exactly where they are going after they die, and what will happen there.  Ever since that hour, I have never again been subject to the constant uncertainty and fear of death that every living creature in the world faces.

Many individuals I know claim that they are free of this fear, but as an arya I know that they are not being honest, nor honest with themselves.  We all fear death, because subconsciously we remember having gone through it before, countless times, and places of long & terrible pain afterwards.  Just for this, I believe, it would be worth it to learn to see emptiness directly, and then see where we are going and who will care for us.

I would put this experience of seeing our immediately future lifetimes and circumstances again into aspect [15], “means,” within the arya truth of the path to the end of suffering, as it relates so closely to the spiritual education we see there already.


We have never done a single act
that was without self-interest

I had another realization in with this group there in front of the holy books on the altar, and I remember somehow that I was focused again on the benches at the center of the temple where I and the other monks sat every week or so to perform our Buddhist ceremonies for the congregation, whose numbers had steadily shrunk from old age until almost any random young American could come and use the empty temple to have a complete emptiness experience for a few hours!

Those benches were where I sat to offer my time and my devotions to the temple members; and us monks often took the opportunity to press the gift of a candy bar or a new rosary into the hands of young and old alike.

But suddenly I had a sad realization that I had never done a truly selfless act in my entire life; and frankly I would include here much of the teaching I have ever done over my entire life, and books I have written or translated (like the one you are reading now!).  Which is to say, normally when any one of us takes it upon themselves to teach another person, even something very holy, there is some percentage of pride involved.

An extreme super-honesty with oneself covering every action we ever undertake on behalf of others is, I think, unique to an arya.  Every single time I had ever stretched out my hand to share something with a fellow suffering human being, I had done so with at least some small percentage of self-interest: hope that they would like me, hope that people would see how good I was.

I suddenly appreciated the advice of Jesus that we should keep our good deeds hidden from others.  And I promised myself I would try to do one good thing that day that was truly anonymous, and free of self-interest.  We’re about to enjoy that one, and I will tell you about it!

I would place this awareness of our inevitable self-interest into aspect [6] within the higher truth of the source of pain; this is called “cause” (hetu in the Sanskrit).



Group Six:
Staying close to diamonds


Suffering worse than physical

I’m sure there were other realizations that went through my head on that day, but these are all that I remember now, fifty years later.  But I do certainly recall what happened next.  I felt very certain that I should get a diamond, somehow, and offer it to the Buddha.

At that point in my life I had almost no money at all.  I was standing still in that northeast part of the Temple, in front of the thousands of pages of ancient scriptures, and I looked out across the lawn towards where drove in and parked their cars.  Standing there was Prof. LaFleur’s fancy red sports car.  I had an idea!

I would go and sell the car, and then take the money to a jewelry store and buy a loose diamond.  I left quietly, and in a few minutes I was driving down to the small nearby town of Lakewood, where there was a car dealer.

As I drove up, the salesman came out of the office and stood with me next to the car.  And then something really strange happened.  So far since “touching the diamond world” I had not been around another person.  Suddenly—still under the influence of my experience—I realized that I could hear his thoughts.

There are some ancient books that describe this kind of phenomenon in terms of prana, or the “inner wind” that the Chinese call chi, and the Japanese call ki.  It is said that we have thousands of inner channels of prana running through our body, three of which are primary.

Running down the front of our backbone is the “main” or “central” channel.  When prana or inner energy flows freely through this channel, our minds are open and free.  When we have the experience of seeing emptiness directly, the prana is flowing full force.

There are two side channels that wrap around the central one.  When we are in an angry or upset mood, one of these channels fills up with prana, choking the flow of “good” prana in the central channel.  When we have thoughts like feeling very possessive—not in the mood to share with others—then the other side channel fills up and again chokes the good prana in the middle.

In terms of this prana, it is said that the full-force prana present when we experience emptiness directly returns back to normal only slowly, say by the end of that day.  This was indeed my own experience, since even a gradually dropping full-force prana is enough to inspire the deep, subsequent realizations we have described above; including now at the car dealer, the ability to hear the salesman’s thoughts.

I should mention that—like all of us—there have been countless occasions in my life when I felt that I knew what another person standing in front of me was thinking.  But this was not at all the same thing, and I can honestly say that I haven’t ever had this ability, before or after my “diamond day.”  Here’s how the inner and outer conversation proceeded.

Car salesman:
Well, this young man certainly seems naive.  I wonder if he really owns the car.
“Well hi there!  What’s your name?”

Mike:
“My name’s Mike, and I need to sell this sports car, today—now.”

Salesman:
“You got the registration?  Is it in your name?”

Mike:
“Sure,” and I hand him the paperwork.

Salesman:
Well, surprise, he really does own the car!
“Well, sure we can help you.  What kind of work do you do, anyway?”

Mike:
“I’m a cook.”

Salesman:
“Where at?”

Mike:
“I cook at a church.”

Salesman:
Inwardly rolling his eyes.  Man!  This kid is a real dummie!  Cook in a church!  I can make some real money off of him!
“No problem!  How would a hundred bucks sound for your car?”

Mike:
Prof. LaFleur’s little beauty is worth maybe three thousand dollars.  But this diamond is going to be a heartfelt offering to the Buddha.  I don’t think I should fight about it.
“Oh, that would be fine!  Thanks a lot!  But say, after that I won’t have a car.  Do you think you could give me a ride to the jewelry store in town?”

Salesman:
“Sure!  Sure!  Happy to do!”

And he hands me a hundred bucks in cash, and I sign the paperwork, and he drives me to the jewelry store.  It’s a tiny store with an elderly owner; I tell him I need to buy the best biggest loose diamond I can get for a hundred dollars.

He sells me a nice full-cut stone of ten points (one tenth of a full carat); 50 years later, I still have the receipt, which eventually I had imbedded in plastic.  Even though the paper has faded pretty badly, I also have a photocopy I made earlier on, which clearly shows the date and the details of the stone.

It’s funny that now I didn’t have a car, and neither did Rinpoche!  I had just sold it!  And so I didn’t have any way to get back to the Mongolian temple!

I walked through town to the public bus station and figured out a way to get close to the Temple on a commuter bus to New York City, and jump off when I needed to.  And then I walked the rest of the way to the Temple, and entered back through the side door.  Rinpoche as usual up to afternoon was locked up in his room reading holy books.

I went to the altar and took the diamond out of its wrapper, and then carefully placed it way back behind all the little Buddha statues, where no one would ever see it.  I felt then that I had made a very pure offering with everything I had, to honor the direct perception of emptiness.

That evening, Khen Rinpoche and I are having dinner together in the tiny temple kitchen.

“Uh Mike, where’s the car?” Rinpoche asks.

“It’s gone,” I reply, a little scared.

“You sold it.  You sold our only car,” says Rinpoche.  I nod silently, more scared.

“You sold it and you took the money and you bought a diamond,” he says matter-of-factly.  “And then you offered the diamond; you hid the diamond way back behind the altar.”

I look at him with my eyes opened wide.  He can’t possibly know all this stuff about a tiny stone much smaller than the fingernail of your little finger.

“That was a good thing,” he says.  “That was a very good thing.  I am going to take the diamond and offer it to my teacher, Trijang Rinpoche.”  And, in time, that’s exactly what he did.  And we survived without a car for quite a while and then someone gave us the ancient red Volkswagen bug that blew up on the highway; but that’s another story of its own.

Trijang Rinpoche was one of the greatest teachers of modern times; if you’ve ever read the book called Liberation in Our Hands, he was the one who wrote it out from lectures by his own teacher, Pabongka Rinpoche, and edited it into one of the greatest examples of Tibetan writing and thought in history.

Which aspect of the four higher truths do we connect here?  I’ve thought about it for years, and I have a suggestion that I think makes the most sense.  I have a theory that the universe has ordained that we are incapable of hearing the true thoughts going on in each other’s heads, simply because we would go mad from the noise and the naked self-interest there.  It has occurred to me that this sad constant conversation deserves the title of aspect [2], pure “suffering” itself (duhkha in the Sanskrit).


Get a job!

I spent the rest of Diamond Day quietly, and when I went to bed that night the “popcorn” string of realizations quieted down; starting from the next morning I no longer had these waves of understanding hitting me every few minutes, and I could no longer read anyone’s mind.  I settled down into a daily schedule of seven years of constant classes with Khen Rinpoche and another monk, an Inner Mongolian whom the locals called Gevshe Nawan Gelden; in Tibetan, Geshe Ngawang Kelden—another refugee who was from the great Drepung Monastery and who acquainted me with the classics from that institution’s 600-year history.

Not long after Diamond Day, my Mother’s estate was settled.  We had lived poor, but her own mother had been quite wealthy, and had died coincidentally not long before my Mom.  This means that one day a large amount of stocks and cash showed up in my bank account.  I was able to live and study night & day for the next eight years; I could have remained like that for the rest of my life, but suddenly we found out that our home monastery, Sera Mey, was in desperate trouble financially and might even be forced to vacate all their buildings.

And so Rinpoche and I sent them everything we had, which saved the monastery but left me with almost nothing.  My teacher sat me down and gave me a talk that changed the direction of my life forever.

“Look, Mike.  You can see by now how monastery life is; you’ve spent eight years here, and you’ve only gone home once to see your family, when your brother died, committed suicide.  You could easily spend the rest of your life here, studying and serving.

“But I want you to get a job.  I want you to work for your living.  I want you to see the troubles and challenges that normal family people face, every single day.  Some day you will be a teacher; some day you will be sharing your Buddhism with all these people.  I don’t see how you can really do a good job, if you have no personal experience at all of what they go through, day in and day out.”

Deep down I was sure I would never follow this advice; but out of politeness for my Teacher I listened and thought about it.  One day I was in a deep meditation and suddenly I saw that I should go to work, and I should work with diamonds: I should get a job where day in and day out I was touching diamonds, and remembering the emptiness I had seen.

Up until then I had figured out a funny way to be around diamonds, to remember.  Walking through the local grocery store one day with Rinpoche, I saw some rock candy for sale: you know, the big sugar crystals that they grow on little sticks that people use to stir a drink and give it a sweet taste.  These crystals were quite close, visually, to diamonds; and I used to buy them weekly and offer them on my altar, to serve as my Diamond Reminder.

I have to say that Rinpoche’s advice, and following it, was one of the most important events in my entire life.  I personally then would count having an authentic, well-trained and compassionate Teacher—and learning to live in the normal world with normal people—is itself one of the 16 aspects.  I would add it to [15] “means,” or the resources to get out of suffering.


Meeting Ofer

And so by late 1980, I was looking for a job near the Temple where I would be able to touch diamonds with my own hands, on a daily basis.  I remember going to over ten different jewelry stores all over my county, asking for work.  The conversation went almost exactly the same, in each case:

	“I need a job where I can touch diamonds every day.”

	The store owner is already suspicious!

	“Well, do you have any experience in the jewelry business?”

	“No, nothing at all.”

“Hmm.  Well, leave your application here with me, and we’ll give you a call 	if any openings come up.”

Which of course they never did.  I remember one interview at a jewelry store where halfway through a mom dragged in her daughter and forced her to have her ears pierced with a special gun that the owner had.  I was out of the door even before the little girl stopped screaming.  Not for me!

Two things then led to a breakthrough.  I started buying a lot of gemology books and studying them; and this way I learned that the Russians had discovered large new diamond mines, and were also doing very innovative research work on diamonds.

All of this was happening because diamonds at the time were essential for important industrial processes like cutting engine components and drilling oil wells.  The United States had done its best to block the Russians from world diamond supplies, and so the Russians were working hard to find diamond deposits in their own country.

Suddenly the Soviet Union was awash in diamonds.  Either they had discovered a real treasure trove, or they had finally figured out how to make genuine diamonds in the laboratory.  Since I had suffered through Russian language at Princeton, I could (with a few dictionaries) work my way through the necessary research papers and news reports.  I became something of an expert in the field, and even published articles for the global diamond syndicate, DeBeers.  I was hoping that this would provide me with an “in” to work with diamonds directly, somewhere!

About the same time, I met a young man who was a diamond sorter at a company called Lazare Kaplan, which was the largest loose diamond supplier in the US at the time.  I tried to get a job at the company through him, but he told me that I would have to do some gemology education even to get an interview.  He advised me to take a gemology degree at the Gemological Institute of America offices in New York, where I could also keep my eye out for someone who might hire me in diamonds.

And so this is what I did.  Simultaneously, I earned gemology degrees from the GIA and from the much more demanding Gemmological Association of Great Britain.  One day at a GIA diamond certifying class in New York, the teacher held up a diamond polished in a special design known as a “old mine cut.”  This particular style of cutting had pretty much died out before 1900.

Our teacher asked us: “If a customer brings a ring with this diamond in it into your store, what can you tell them about it?”  We all agreed that we could say it was quite old, and had probably been in the family for generations.

There was a quiet man in the back of the class who generally said very little, but now he raised his hand.  “Well, not really,” he noted.  “Diamond is the hardest thing we know of in the universe, and there’s no normal thing that can scratch it.  Therefore it is impossible to look at a diamond cut in the old mine style and say, from abrasion or any other sign, whether it was cut 100 years ago, or this morning!”

The whole class, including the teacher, was stunned.  Quite so!

But I was thinking different things.  I thought I would get to know this man—whose name was Ofer Azrielant—and see if maybe he could hire me, assuming he owned a diamond company.  I made an excuse to see him in his office in Manhattan, and by great good luck (past seeds) he was at that moment starting up a new diamond jewelry company—having already built one in his home country, Israel.


Andin International Diamond Jewelry

We started working together, and shortly afterwards Ofer’s wife Aya traveled from Tel Aviv to join us.  We borrowed $50,000 from a dealer in London named Shemtov; rented a larger space near the Empire State Building; and started building our line.  We called the company Andin International Diamond Jewelry.

We worked hard and grew and grew, and eventually Andin became the largest among the many thousands of jewelry makers in the world, with annual sales of about $250 million dollars per year.  I served as vice-president in charge of the worldwide diamond buying operation.

As long as we are all living in bodies that will crumble into dust within a short time—and we don’t know how very short that time might be—it doesn’t seem to make any sense for us to devote our priceless hours to collecting more money and things that we will very shortly be leaving behind.  But the fact that out of those many thousands of companies, the company that was built partly because of a deep spiritual experience became the largest of its kind in the world says something, I think, about where all money and success really comes from.

What I mean to point out is that—by dedicating ourselves to deeper spiritual goals, in a way informed by the ancient classics—the worldly goals (I mean, it’s not so bad to have a good car that works well, or a house with enough room to do all the projects you’d like to do) come automatically; our company proves it.  You can relax and be successful both in this life and afterwards too.

During my first week at Andin, I handled I think 3 diamonds.  By the time our company was bought by super-investor Warren Buffett, my department was evaluating about 300,000 diamonds per week.  I remember one day, quite some years after we started together, Ofer asked me: “One thing I always wondered.  Here you are with an honors degree from Princeton in religion; and you are one of the only westerners in history to earn a geshe degree, from one of the largest Buddhist monasteries in the world.  What the heck are you doing in the diamond business?”

I tell you this whole story because I want you to know how important the diamond is to a person who has seen emptiness directly—you would be willing to commute to New York for 3 or 4 hours a day, for 20 years, just to touch some diamonds that day.

Again, I would place these decades with the diamonds in New York in with aspect [11], “beauty”—the same as the first diamond on that first day.  If I were you and I was still trying to make up my mind whether Michael Roach really did ever see emptiness directly, I would take into account this weird fact that he spent so many years with the diamonds.

And as mentioned, we have in historical Buddhism the unexplained title “Diamond Cutter Sutra”; along with the primary enlightened beings named Vajradhara (“Holder of the Diamond”) and Vajrapani (“Keeper of the Diamond”); and the entire half of the teachings known as the Vajrayana, or the Diamond Way—where every disciple is required to have and use a vajra ritual instrument with the precise shape of a twinned octagonal crystal, relatively common with diamonds.  Surely there is something going on here.



Group Seven:
Passing it on, and the next 500 years

Real diamond cutting

People ask me if my company was ever involved in blood diamonds—the sleazy side of the diamond business—and I can honestly say that we never purchased a single stone from the entire continent of Africa.  We were jewelry makers, and as such we only bought open-market diamonds that had already been cut, from cutting centers like Mumbai, Tel Aviv, or Antwerp.

I felt an intense desire though—you can guess why—to learn the arcane art of cutting diamonds by hand.  Master diamond cutters in New York were a rare breed, handling only the largest and finest stones in the world, due to the very high cost of labor and office rents in Manhattan.  Very few masters would agree to waste their time for years training a curious jewelry company executive.

There is also a (foolish) saying among diamond cutters that it is foolish to train the person who might take away your next cutting job.  Even if a master agrees to teach you, there are secret methods that they will rarely share with anyone, even a prized apprentice.

But here, as often happened in my diamond exploits, I got lucky.  Years before I had hired a secretary from a rabbi’s office named Rachel Shmuelof.  Rachel and I pretty much built the stone buying operation at Andin together, and at some point I found out that her husband, Sam Shmuelof, was a master diamond cutter, right in the middle of the Diamond District in Manhattan!

We made a deal, and late at night for many months I trudged up to Shmuel’s cutting shop to learn the trade.  One day I reached a point where I uncovered the secret to making a perfect stone (which I won’t share with you), and then I knew I could let my literal diamond cutting career go.  I actually bought an old cutting setup from Sam and installed it quietly in the dreary unfinished basement of the little temple house back home; but I kept losing stones that fell off in the dirt, and I finally gave it up.

This literal cutting of diamonds—and the urge to do so, really—I count as one more facet of aspect [11], “beauty.”


The Diamond Cutter:
The Buddha on Managing
Your Business and Your Life

At a point in the mid 1990’s, I was trying to come up with ways to organize our growing database of digitalized ancient books—which had reached over 1,000 manuscripts.  I wrote an essay online about a fantasy project (impossible with the computing resources at the time) where the user of the database assumed an avatar—for example, an eagle—and then flew through a city where each building represented different classics.  You just soar up to the window of the book you want to study, fly inside, talk (or squawk) at the wall, and the text you want comes up.

The cutest part of this plan was that each of the five boroughs of The City represented one of the six great topics of Buddhism.  Here we could split Manhattan—the island in the middle of New York—into the two branches of Middle Way (Madhyamika); which allows for the unexpected idiosyncracies of the Bronx to cover the secret teachings (Diamond Way). 

Turns out that the religion editor at Doubleday Publishing Corporation—the largest book company in the United States at the time—came across my little essay online and was immediately intrigued.  One very busy day at my office, he called me up.  I’m sitting inbetween two tables covered with loose diamonds, trying not to sweep a pile of them onto the floor with the phone cord.

“Hi Michael, this is Trace Murphy, calling from uptown—I wondered it we could have a talk!”

Ah!  Finally, a headhunter is going to offer me double the salary to jump to another jewelry company!  I’m happy here, but let’s see what he has to say.

“Yes, how can I help you?”

“Well, I came across that essay you wrote online about a new concept for cataloging all the Buddhist books in history.  I was really impressed!”

I just about fall off the chair.  I was sure no one had read it, or even cared about cataloging all the Buddhist books in history.

“And well,” continues Trace, “we’d like you to write a book for us.”

“What kind of book?”

“Any book you want!” laughs Trace (I’m beginning to like this guy).  “And we’ll pay you $50,000 up front!”

Now I really do fall off the chair.  As of the year of this writing, that was over $100,000, even before the book was written.  I later learned that Trace received about 1,500 manuscripts per week in the mail, unsolicited, from wanna-be famous authors; and here he was calling an unknown writer.

Still, it’s all a little hard to believe.

“Well, what kind of books have you published lately?” I ask.

“I just finished up editing a book by Mother Theresa, and before that I put out the biography of the Pope,” says Trace.  These are like the two most important religious figures in the world at the time!

“Well, okay!  But I don’t need the money.  I don’t like to take money for something I haven’t done yet.”

“But you have to take it,” he laughs again.  “An advance is part of the process.”

I agreed, and went to work at home, in my spare time—in fact, sitting in the Mongolian temple at the same spot where I touched emptiness directly.

The book I had in mind was an account of the spiritual awakening I had gone through with my angel, Veronica, in the garden of our church, as teenagers—which I felt was very much like the story of Dante and Beatrice in the famous Divine Comedy, written about seven centuries earlier.

Except that in addition to meeting a Buddha, my protagonist on different nights would bump into different Buddhist thinkers from the last few thousand years, and learn a different lesson from each one.  I had a lot of fun giving each Master their own personality, each based on one of the teachers in my 25-year studies to complete the geshe degree, at both the Temple and overseas at Sera Mey Monastery.

When I was just finishing up this book—which I entitled The Garden—I was also completing a series of 18 courses in English, with the the idea of passing on the essence of the geshe course to foreigners, within a 6-year period instead of 25 years.  I taught these courses for free five nights a week in Manhattan; the study group rapidly grew from 5 people to almost 100, and we kept renting bigger and bigger spaces—ending up at the Fifteenth Street Friends Meeting House, a beautiful Quaker church in New York’s East Village.

One of these courses was based on the Diamond Cutter Sutra; I remember finishing a big part of it in hospital waiting rooms while Khen Rinpoche went through some procedures.  I suddenly saw a way to combine the sutra with a book of business and personal advice based on its principles.  I called Trace and begged him for a second book contract, before I had even finished the first.

He told me to go for it, and I literally finished the manuscript on the last day before I went into a deep 3-year silent retreat in the Arizona desert, in 2000.  I remember turning it over to my assistant just before I went through the front gate, for the last time in a thousand days.

The Diamond Cutter since has become an international bestseller, spawning a 10th anniversary edition and a 20th one too; with the black-market versions, nobody has an exact count, but it has apparently sold several million copies, in more than 30 languages.

I believe that—in the end—the image of cutting the diamond has a deep spiritual resonance in every human being: on some level, we are all aware of emptiness and its power to take us to a higher level of evolution, immortal and infinitely wise.  We may not have seen the luminous images creating every detail of our world from seeds planted in our mind by how kindly we treat other living beings; but on some level we all know: on some level we all know we should be kind to each other.

Again I would place this literary diamond-cutting in with aspect [11], “beauty,” within the arya truth of the end of suffering.


Sea change

During the 20 years or so since I completed that 3-year retreat, the publication of The Diamond Cutter book has spawned a large number of organizations dedicated to using the wisdom of the diamond in a whole variety of human endeavors.  The Asian Legacy Library (ALL) continues the work of the Asian Classics Input Project (ACIP) in locating, imaging, and creating searchable input for their free online database, which now contains tens of thousands of titles.  We hope in the coming decades to complete the 300,000 or so great books of Asia.  Much of the first decades of the project were paid for from my diamond jewelry company.

The Diamond Cutter Classics (DCC) translation team, over the last 10 years, has translated many thousands of pages of these ancient classics of Asia into modern languages, and has offered thousands of hours of free online classes in translating the languages of these texts.  Diamond Cutter Press (DCP) has published many of these books, along with secondary translations into many languages through its affiliates worldwide.  Diamond Cutter Jewels (DCJ) has produced and sold diamond jewelry designs for fundraising to support all these efforts.

The courses I wrote in New York have expanded, first through the Asian Classics Institute (ACI) and then through the 5 Houses organization.  Many thousands of people worldwide have taken their thousands of pages of courses.  The Diamond Cutter Institute Global (DCIG) for 17 years has taught tens of thousands of clients throughout the world non-religious, business-oriented classes based on the ancient classics.  The Sedona College of International Management (SCIM), for twelve years, has trained hundreds of business coaches for this effort.

Diamond Mountain Retreat Center—recently designated by Forbes business magazine as the second best star-gazing getaway location in the United States—has for over 20 years provided a perfectly silent retreat opportunity for many thousands of people from all over the globe.

Students and friends of the next generation have founded successful projects throughout the world; for example, Diamond Silk Entrepreneur University (DSEU) features the classic literature of the ancient Silk Road in a study program currently being evaluated for official accreditation.  And the Innovation Retreats organization (IR) provides business retreats for entrepreneurs worldwide who seek new sources of innovation.

The reason I mention all these projects born after my diamond world experience is that I hope to convey to you the feeling of a huge wave of cause-and-effect, across many lifetimes and worlds.  Again, I cannot see my past lives directly, but I can see them with the unerring eyes of simple logic.

Nothing comes from nothing.  There is a prior cause of every single event and detail of our thought, just as a tall tree in the front yard of our home stands witness to the principle of tree seeds that we have never seen.

And remember that these mental seeds are literally creating you, and your world, and everything that ever happens in that world.  The process of seeing emptiness directly—which is the only thing that can save human kind from endless cycles of death and suffering—is like a huge ocean wave that is born deep in the depths of many past lifetimes, and then rolls on growing more and more large and powerful, until the day that the wave breaks and we touch that diamond world.

And then on the beach where that wave lays down its water, life grows and spreads, for centuries.  The moment of touching emptiness directly is not a moment, it is an eon of change among all the history of life itself.

I would place this last section—the inevitable social consequences of a human being touching the diamond world—in aspect [12], “escape” (nihsarana in the Sanskrit), within the higher truth of the end of suffering.


Continuing education

I wanted to add one more short piece of advice here for everyone.  It takes a great amount of formal study of the classics of Buddhism to touch the diamond world; that’s why we have this huge 4-volume emptiness treatise by Je Tsongkapa here, in the first place.

But it’s important to say that—even after seeing emptiness directly—our study and practice has only just begun.  After seeing emptiness, I personally went through the entire traditional 25-year course of the geshe, or Master of Buddhism, to give long-term structure and support to my experience.  I sincerely believe that even after having this once-on-a-planet experience, we still need constant study and meditation upon the classics that have gone before.

This also applies to ordination, and taking on other vows of moral behavior such as the bodhisattva and diamond-way commitments.  I had lived the monk’s way of life at the Mongol temple—together with some 15 senior monks—for eight years, before Khen Rinpoche allowed me to take ordination.  That is, eight years after I had already reached the highest goal of studying and practice.

Here too we have the example of Lord Buddha’s first five students—the tiger cubs.  We’ve mentioned how they each saw emptiness; but what we should also say is that each one of them also became a monk: the first five monks of our Buddha’s sangha, or community.  They were so ready to take on ordination that their hair was shaved off, and the golden robes formed around their bodies, automatically—just by Lord Buddha saying “Come to me.”

It’s crucial that we appreciate this connection between vowed morality and the direct experience of emptiness.  We’ve learned how—during the “pot on the stove” experience—we see directly, for the first time, the way in which our world really is a construct of luminous images coming out of karmic seeds in our mind.  Sticking to a regimen of moral guidelines then is the only way to live our lives, since every detail of those lives is flowing out of seeds planted by this way of life.  And seeing emptiness directly is the only way that a human being can cement this understanding inside of them, permanently.

My close friends know that my daily schedule usually includes 5 hours of study and contemplation, including translating the classics into modern languages, and another solid hour of deep meditation.  The rest of my life then takes care of itself automatically, after noon, and I’m talking about the serious work of managing over 40 successful companies and organizations, now at the age of 73.  After nearly 50 years of this sort of schedule, I believe that this kind of discipline makes for a very happy and successful life.

In the modern world, this includes what my friends and I call the “Good Night Book Club.”  This is a common commitment we all keep to put away our electronics—cellphone, computer, television—by 10pm.  This is followed by a few minutes of reading the great wisdom classics in translation (such as the one you have here); and then getting a solid, full night’s sleep and rising at 6am.

The early American philosopher Benjamin Franklin noted that “Early to bed and early to rise makes a person healthy, wealthy, and wise.”  The very early morning time, before the entire rest of the world has started off on its daily race, is the prime time for a practicioner.

Again, I would categorize the different components of “continuing education” that we’ve described in this section as aspect [15]: a “means” (pratipatti in the Sanskrit) of enabling the fourth truth, the path to the end of suffering.


Living with the world

There’s sort of a final question here that we should address.  How did I describe my experience to my teacher, on that fateful day, and how did I speak of it with the other monks I was living with, and with teachers and friends for the rest of my life?

On the day that I saw emptiness, I had a strong, additional realization that I should not speak about what had happened to me.  At the time, I didn’t know exactly why; but I did know that it wouldn’t be good.

I got a hint of an answer afterwards.  Khen Rinpoche had allowed a doctoral student at a university to visit us for a few weeks at a time, to take special classes about the subject of his dissertation.  I remember that the two of us were standing on the highway near the temple, waiting to flag down a bus.

The student suddenly remarked to me that I had done a really foolish thing to sell my fancy red sports car for almost nothing, just to make an offering in the temple.  I looked sideways at his face and just for a second I thought maybe there was a demon inside of him—just for the length of those few sentences.

I am not a superstitious person and it’s not that I think about devils or demons, almost ever.  But I do believe that on that day, I saw one take over a person, if only for a few sentences.  Shortly afterwards, this individual had some terrible and sad circumstances in their life, and I always felt that their attitude had somehow contributed strongly to that.

I thought for many years that at best, people would simply not believe me if I described my emptiness experience; and that at worst they might criticize it out of their ignorance, and then make terrible trouble for themselves.  As for my teachers, it felt improper to talk about things that might seem as though I thought I was above them; which, even though it didn’t seem that they had undergone the same experience, I never did think.

And so I have spoken about the things you read here only very gradually, and partially, to close friends and students.  Now, with my health at risk and with my advanced age, I feel as though I should leave as detailed a record as I can.

Over the length of my life I have run into cynical people, particularly in the media but also otherwise well-meaning spiritual seekers, for example, who have mocked or attacked my viewpoints and way of life.  I say to them here that there is no point in expending your irreplaceable time and breath on me, if I am not what I say I am.  Go and live your life and use the few precious hours of this life to pursue something good and valuable to you.  The words here are not meant for you now; but I promise I will save them for you to enjoy one day, when you are ready!  Just relax.

This “reticence of an arya” is a common theme in scriptural treatments of emptiness which say that a person who has seen emptiness may not be able to describe it fully to others.  This is more a comment upon the “others” in question, than to imply that emptiness cannot be described in a way which helps others to see it.  Otherwise there would be no point for example to the tens of thousands of pages in Lord Buddha’s sutras on the “perfection of wisdom”—the prajna paramita (technical spelling prajñā pāramitā).  And after all, even The Buddha himself hesitated for those famous seven weeks after total enlightenment, to speak to his five tiger cubs of what he had seen.

Not teaching emptiness when the time is not yet ready can again be included, I would say, in an arya’s apect of [15] “means,” in the form of spiritual education.


Babysitting a planet

There is one final image from the day that I touched emptiness.  It occurs almost exactly 500 years from now.  On that day, I reach enlightenment, and become a Buddha myself.  I know that the Buddhist classics describe this as becoming a force on every planet in the universe; but I also know that I will have a special relationship with a single particular world.

There is a persistent image of looking down on this world from above; and beside me is the enlightened being in my own life, my wife Veronica.  I see that each one of us will live this way, as the wisdom of the diamond spreads in this world.


A summary of the 16 aspects, or moments

As we wrap up here, let’s present a summary of how—from my own experience of touching emptiness directly—I would describe the famous 16 aspects, or “moments,” of the four higher truths.  I will be putting here sometimes experiences which are personal to my own life, but they are meant to help you assign your own experiences in a similar manner.  That is, each one of us has to go through the 16 moments in our own way; and what I offer here is just meant to help you fill in the blanks on your own list.

Master Vasubandhu (c. 350ad) offers some similar advice on the four truths in his Detailed Commentary on the Sutra Taught by the Higher Being named “Never-Ending Wisdom”:

Here’s how you should proceed if you meet up with a person who can grasp things with no more than a summary presentation.  These types of people you can engage simply by mentioning no more than the names of the four higher truths.

If though you meet up with someone who understands things better with a little detail, then teach them a version of the four higher truths where you break the same four truths out into 16 aspects, or “moments.”

There are two further points we can usefully make here, about these 16.  First of all, it does seem that these may originally have been more or less than 16; it often feels that the set of four fours may be primarily for symmetry.  The great Sera Jetsun Chukyi Gyeltsen has some valuable comments on this in his dialectic analysis of the great Jewel of Realizations of the next Buddha—Maitreya.

Secondly, it is recognized that some aspects might overlap one another, so that an individual experience may correlate to more than one aspect; certainly we have felt this in our study here.  As an example here, Je Tsongkapa himself describes a crossover of something that falls under both the truth of the path to the end of suffering, and the truth of suffering itself.  This for example would apply, he says, in cases of meditation by someone who is in the period subsequent to seeing emptiness directly for the first time.

In the meantime though, here is one arya’s attempt to help you discover the real meaning of the 16 aspects in your own life, which is inevitably what each of us needs to do—


The 16 Aspects,
or Moments, Summarized

	A. Moments of the truth of suffering (duhkha, duk-ngel)

		[1] Impermanence (anitya, mitakpa)

—The long illness and death of my mother, especially as witnessed in a heightened state during our studies of Buddhism together in the Himalayas.  The direct perception of an arya—immediately after seeing emptiness—of how they themselves will lie down flat on the earth, dead, at the end of this life

		[2] Suffering (duhkha, duk-ngel)

—The ability of an arya, later in the day on which they saw emptiness directly, to hear directly the inner conversation of other people, and how intensely self-interested this conversation is

		[3] Emptiness (shunya, tongpa)

—Emptiness (here as a subcategory of the first higher truth) not in the sense of the lack of an object coming from its own side, but rather in the sense of the meaninglessness of a life focused solely on the accumulation of money and material goods

		[4] No self-nature (anatma, dakmey)

—The truth of no self-nature, again, as a subcategory of the first higher truth: the fact that no undesirable experience has to lack any value for us personally; nothing is “useless” from its own side; learning from the pain of a breakup, for example


	B. Moments of the truth of the source of suffering (samudaya, kunjung)

		[5] Source (samudaya, kunjung)

—It is the negative seeds in my mind, especially, which produce my constantly repeated personal existence of death and pain

		[6] Cause (hetu, gyu)

—The realization of an arya that every act they have ever undertaken in their life so far—even good deeds—was deeply motivated by self-interest

		[7] Spring (prabhava, rab tu kyewa)

—The realization of an arya that nothing comes from nothing, or leads to nothing: we have lived countless previous lifetimes in pain, before we came here—striving and dying again and again—and unless we do something about it, this will continue 

		[8] Factor (pratyaya, kyen)

—The way in which luminous images emerging from seeds planted by our past deeds—good or bad—exit our minds in a millisecond-by-millisecond flow, and combine to create the people and the world around us


	C. Moments of the truth of the end of suffering (nirodha, gokpa)

		[9] End (nirodha, gokpa)

—Because of our direct experience of the mental seeds and luminous pictures during the “pot on the stove” or similar event, all the seeds that could create for us the image of a lower rebirth have been prevented or “spoiled”: we may still have some from before, but they are like ruined flower seeds that will never produce another full plant in our garden.  Later on the same day, we see emptiness directly, and “enter the stream” that leads directly to Buddhahood, stopping all suffering rebirths at all; knowing all things; and helping all living beings.  We see finally too that neither things nor living beings—including myself—ever come from anywhere except the mental seeds I have planted by helping or hurting others in the past
				
		[10] Peace (shanta, shiwa)

—Immediately subsequent to seeing emptiness directly, the direct experience of bodhichitta: meeting directly every single living being in the universe, and making a personal commitment to them that I will reach full enlightenment myself, and then  come to save them too.  The direct perception by an arya that they have 7 lifetimes left to go, before they become an enlightened being
		
		[11] Beauty (pranita, gyanompa)

—Every arya, every person who sees emptiness directly, casts about just after that perception for something in this normal reality that can forever remind them of the higher reality they have just seen directly, but may not be able to see whenever they want to, until they reach a higher level.  Every arya arrives at the diamond, which is the closest normal thing (although not really close) to emptiness—this is because diamonds represent a physical “ultimate” (hardest thing in the universe); because they are “invisible” (perfectly transparent); and all completely equal internally (pure carbon), wherever they exist.  This is the reason why the name “diamond” keeps reappearing in the ancient books of wisdom; for example, in the “Diamond Cutter Sutra,” and enlightened beings with “diamond” in their name; and expessions like “the diamond way.”  Here also we include the undeniable desire to work closely with physical diamonds, or their representation, for the rest of an arya’s lifetime, after touching the diamond world.  This may include especially literally learning to cut diamonds; but certainly includes as well as passing on the teachings of emptiness in books and teachings

		[12] Escape (nihsarana, ngepar jungwa)

—The inevitable consequences on the society around them during the extended period after a person touches emptiness directly; the work of the new arya for the rest of their life and lifetimes


	D. Moments of the truth of the path to the end of suffering (marga, lam)

		[13] Path (marga, lam)

—Learning the principles behind deep meditation, and then engaging in a regular practice which very gradually but surely allows us to build up to shamatha, where we are able to remain in one-pointed, focused meditation for one hour or more.  Simplifying many small and large details of our daily life in order to achieve this focus.  Staying mindful of our egoness.  Cleaning up our finances, to help free up our mind

		[14] Logic (nyaya, rikpa)

—Past life events (especially that contribute to our seeing emptiness directly in this lifetime) that we “perceive” logically, by working backwards from strong events or tendencies we exhibit in this present life; particularly in our childhood
		
		[15] Means (pratipatti, druppa)

—An in-depth and long-term study of the Buddhist classics, particularly the five geshe subjects, under a qualified master.  The devoted and intense service of the Dharma and teachers of the Dharma.  Honoring all representations of enlightened beings as if they were those beings themselves.  Having an authentic, well-trained and compassionate Teacher—and learning to live in the normal world with normal people, to help them.  Continuing, even after we see emptiness directly, in a deep and constant study of the Buddhist classics.  Seeing our immediately future lifetimes and circumstances directly; knowing we will be well taken care of and further trained.  Committing to a moral code—such as ordination, or the bodhisattva vows, or the secret commitments—in recognition of how this constantly plants the reality around me.  Committing to a daily spiritual practice, including specified periods of meditation and study of the classics, without my electronics—and including a regular schedule of 8 hours of sleep at night, and early rising to accomplish this practice.  Not speaking of having touched emptiness, or similar topics, until the listener is really ready

		[16] Method (nairyanika, ngepar jinpa)

—Study and meditation upon the ancient principle of chi-jedrak: quality & characteristic; where we learn subtleties of the relationship between the quality of “carness” in general and a particular real car in our life which is characteristic of that carness.  The personal recognition that the written records of enlightened teaching are almost literally the only thing that can help all human beings on this world to free themselves from pain






A course of study & practice

I apologize if I have gone on too long in this preface to the great Je Tsongkapa’s classic on emptiness; but I strongly feel that his highly technical (and supremely accurate) presentation goes well in tandem with an account of the same material from the point of view of purely personal experience.

I personally believe that deciding to yourself that you will commit some major time and effort to work through the teachings on emptiness from these two directions—technical presentation, and personal experience—is the very best use you can make of the months and years left to you in this life.  Later in your life, you will realize that this is the very best thing you could have done with that priceless lifetime of yours.

It is my intention to continue this work by designing practical courses, for people of different personalities, to develop within them the realizations we have outlined here.  I encourage you to go online and watch for these courses as they are released by organizations—each with their own particular emphasis and policies—such as the 5 Houses; Diamond Cutter Institute Global (DCIG); Sedona College of International Management (SCIM); Classics Soft Power (CSP); Innovation Retreats (IR); Diamond Silk Entrepreneur University (DSEU); and the Yoga Studies Institute (YSI).  Relevant translations of original and ancient classics that relate to this material will continue to be published through the efforts of the Diamond Cutter Classics (DCC) translators of ancient Asian literature; the Diamond Cutter Press (DCP); and the Asian Legacy Library (ALL).  I hope to see you there, where we can work together.

Geshe Michael Roach
Rainbow House
Rimrock, Arizona
USA

June 25, 2026










Illumination
of the True Thought



Chapter 1
Perfect Happiness




Illumination
of the True Thought


Chapter 1
Perfect Happiness

The offering of praise,
and a pledge to compose the work

[1]
[f. 1a]
*,,BSTAN BCOS CHEN PO
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RNAM BSHAD
DGONGS PA RAB GSAL BZHUGS SO,,

The Illumination of the True Thought:
An Extensive Explanation of that
Magnificent Classical Commentary,
“Entering the Middle Way”


[2]
[f. 1b] #,,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB GSAL ZHES BYA BA,

Here begins The Illumination of the True Thought, an extensive explanation of Entering the Middle Way.


[3]
RJE BTZUN BLA MA ‘JAM PA’I DBYANGS DANG, ‘PHAGS PA YAB SRAS RNAMS KYI ZHABS LA GUS PA CHEN POS PHYAG ‘TSAL ZHING SKYABS SU MCHI’O,

In deep respect I bow at the feet of my Holy Lama, Gentle Voice, and at the feet of those realized beings, the Father & Son.  Please be my shelter.


[4]
,ZAB CING RGYA CHE’I LEGS BSHAD KUN GYI GTER,
,’JIG RTEN KUN GYI MA ‘DRIS MDZA’ BSHES TE,
,SA GSUM ‘GRO LA LAM BZANG MTSON PA’I MIG
,THUB DBANG SMRA BA’I NYI MAS RTAG TU SKYONGS,

You are a goldmine
Of every fine explanation:
The profound & the wide.
You are the best friend
Of every living being,
Unbeknownst to them.

You are the eyes 
Of all those who dwell
In all three of the lands;
O Sun of Speakers,
Lord of the Able,
Protect us always.


[5]
,RAB ‘BYAMS RGYAL BA’I ‘KHOR DU ZAB MO’I GNAS,
,YANG DAG PHUL GYI GTAM GYI SENG GE’I SGRA,
,KUN NAS SGROG LA MTSUNGS PA MA MCHIS PA’I,
,’JAM DBYANGS BLA MAS RTAG TU BYIN GYIS RLOBS,

You are beyond compare—
Among all who attend
To the billions of victorious
Buddhas there are—
In the way you proclaim,
With your lion’s roar,

That highest of all the words
Which can ever be spoken:
That deepest thought.

I pray I may always be blessed
By my Lama,
By Gentle Voice himself.


[6]
,DUS GSUM BDE BAR GSHEGS PA’I [f. 2a] THUGS KYI BCUD,
,MTHA’ BRAL DBU MA RTEN CING ‘BREL ‘BYUNG LAM,
,JI BZHIN ‘GREL PAR LUNG BSTAN KLU SGRUB LA,
,SNYING NAS ‘DUD DO BRTZE BA’I LCAGS KYUS ZUNGS,

The very cream
Within the holy minds
Of all who have Gone To Bliss,
Past & present & future,
Is the Middle Way,
Free of extremes:
The path of dependence.

From the depths of my heart
I bow myself
To Master Nagarjuna,
The one who it was foretold would come
And unfold this way.
Set, I pray, the iron hook
Of your love within my breast.


[7]
,MGON DE’I GDAMS PAS GO ‘PHANG MTHOR GSHEGS NAS,
,NYID KYIS GZIGS GANG ‘GRO LA GSAL MDZAD PA’I,
,LEGS LAM STON PA’I GTAM LA DBANG ‘BYOR PA,
,DPAL LDAN ‘PHAGS PA LHA YI ZHABS LA ‘DUD,

There was one who received
The advices of this protector
And reached the heights of realization;
Who went on to describe
The things he had seen himself
Clearly to the rest of us:

I bow thus at the feet
Of the Glorious One,
To Master Aryadeva,
Rich in the words
Which instruct us
In that excellent path.


[8]
,RJE BTZUN ‘JAM PA’I DBYANGS KYI BKA’ GRUB CING,
,’PHAGS PA’I DGONGS PA MTHAR THUG GSAL BAR MDZAD,
,GRUB PA’I RIG ‘DZIN GNAS SU GSHEGS GYUR PA,
,SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS KYI ZHABS LA MGOS PHYAG ‘TSAL,

I bow and touch
My head as well
To the feet of Buddha Palita,
Who carried out
The command of the holy
Gentle Voice;

Who clarified
The ultimate intent
Of the Realized One,
And who reached the state
Of an accomplished one,
A keeper of the knowledge.


[9]
,PHRA LA RTOGS DKA’ DRANG SRONG CHEN PO’I LAM,
,KLU SGRUB LUGS KYI THUN MONG MIN PA’I GNAD,
,YONGS SU RDZOGS PAR STON MDZAD ZLA BA’I ZHABS,
,ZHI BA LHA DANG BCAS PA’I ZHABS LA ‘DUD,

I bow as well
At the feet of the holy
Chandrakirti,
Who along with Master Shantideva
Has instructed us
In every single one

Of the unique & crucial points
Found in the system
Of Master Nagarjuna:
In the path of this great saint,
A way which is subtle
And difficult to grasp.


[10]
,KLU SGRUB ‘PHAGS PA LHA YI GRUB PA’I MTHA’,
,SHING RTA CHEN PO GSUM GYIS [f. 2b] BKRAL BA NYID,
,THUN MONG MA YIN GNAD DON KUN RDZOGS PAR,
,DRI MED BLO GROS MIG GIS LEGS MTHONG ZHING,

I have seen, perfectly,
With the eyes of 
Immaculate wisdom,
Each & every one
Of the unique
And crucial points

In the philosophical system
Of Nagarjuna and Aryadeva,
Just as this was commented upon
By every one of the three
Magnificent innovators.


[11]
,PHYOGS ‘DIR LUGS DE ‘CHAD ‘DOD PHAL MO CHES,
,BSHAD PA’I DRI MAS SBAGS PA BSAL PHYIR DANG,
,GZHAN GYIS BSKUL PHYIR YONGS DAG BSHAD PA YIS,
,DBU MA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA BYA,,

For this reason,
I shall now undertake
A highly accurate
And detailed explanation 
Of Entering the Middle Way;

I do so also because
I hope to clear away
The stench of the corruptions
Found in the great majority
Of the explanations of this system
Attempted thus far in our land;

And as well because I have been begged
By others to compose this work.



The meaning of the title of the book:
“Entering the Middle Way”

[12]
‘DIR ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I DON GNYIS, PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA’I BSTAN BCOS CHEN PO DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA RANG GI ‘GREL PA DANG MTHUN PAR ‘CHAD PA LA BZHI, MTSAN GYI DON, ‘GYUR GYI PHYAG ,GZHUNG GI DON, MJUG GI DON NO,,

The great classical commentary entitled Entering the Middle Way sets forth, in an unmistaken way, the meaning of both the profound side of the teachings, and their widespread side.  Here I undertake to explain this work, following the intent of its autocommentary.  My explanation covers four broad sections: the meaning of the title of the work; the translators’ obeisance; the meaning of the body of the text; and finally the meaning of its conclusion.


	[13]
	[title]
	[f. 201b]
*,,RGYA GAR SKAD DU,
MA DHY’A MA KA AA BA T’A RA N’A MA,
BOD SKAD DU,
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA ZHES BYA BA,

In the language of India, this book is called Madhyamaka
Avatara Nama.
In the language of Tibet, it is called Uma La Jukpa Shejawa.
In the English language, these translate as
“The Book known as Entering the Middle Way”


[14]
DANG PO NI, RGYA GAR NA SKAD RIGS BZHI YOD PA’I LEGS PAR SBYAR BA’I SKAD DU NA, BSTAN BCOS ‘DI’I MTSAN MA DHY’A MA KA AA BA T’A RA N’A MA’O, ,DE BOD KYI SKAD DU BSGYUR NA, DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA ZHES BYA BA’O,,

Here is the first.  In India, there were four major language groups; of these, the title of this classic is given in Sanskrit: Madhyamaka Avatara Nama.  Translated into Tibetan, this would be Uma La Jukpa [or, in English, Entering the Middle Way].


[15]
‘DIR GANG LA ‘JUG PA’I DBU MA NI, DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LA ‘JUG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, ZHES GSUNGS PAS DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS YIN LA, DE YANG ‘DI’I ‘GREL PAR RTZA SHE KHUNGS SU MDZAD PA NA DBU MA LAS, ZHES MANG DU GSUNGS PA LTAR RTZA SHE LA BYA’I, DBU MA’I GZHUNG GZHAN DANG, DBU MA’I DON GZHAN LA MI BYA’O,,

Now just what is the “middle way” that the commentary is “entering” into?  It is the Classical Commentary on the Middle Way; after all, he says “because it enters into the Classical Commentary on the Middle Way.”  And in his commentary as well Master Chandrakirti often says “from The Middle Way” when he is using The Foundational Verses entitled “Wisdom” as a source.  As such, “middle way” in this case refers to The Foundational Verses entitled “Wisdom,” and not to some other major work on the middle way, nor to some other connotation of “middle way.”


[16]
MA DHY’A MA KA’I SKAD KYI BYINGS LA BRTZAMS NAS, DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS SAM DBU MA’I GRUB MTHA’ LA DBU MAR BYAS PAR SHES RAB SGRON MAR YANG BSHAD PAS, DBU MA ZHES PA TZAM LAS MA BYUNG YANG, ‘DIR DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LA GO BAR BYA’O,,

The Lamp on Wisdom, which of course is working from the original Sanskrit term madhyamaka, also refers both to the Classical Commentary on the Middle Way and to the philosophical system of the Middle Way as “middle way.”  Thus we can say that here in the title of Master Chandrakirti’s work we are meant to understand that he is referring to the Classical Commentary on the Middle Way even when he directly mentions no more than “the middle way.”


[17]
‘O NA [f. 3a] RTZA BA SHES RAB LA BSTAN BCOS ‘DIS ‘JUG TSUL DE JI ‘DRA ZHIG CE NA, ‘DI LA KHA CIG BSTAN BCOS DER KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PA’I RANG BZHIN RGYAS PAR MA BRJOD LA, ‘DIR DE GNYIS RGYAS PAR BSTAN PAS DE LA ‘JUG GO ,ZHES ZER RO,,

“Well then,” you may ask.  “Just how is it that Master Chandrakirti’s classical commentary ‘enters’ the Foundational Verses called ‘Wisdom’?”  Some have made the claim that “In that other classical commentary the deceptive and ultimate natures of things are not described in detail; whereas here they are.”


[18]
DE KHO NA NYID GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA’I RIGS PA’I RNAM GRANGS NI, ‘JUG PA LAS RTZA BA SHES RAB SHIN TU RGYAS PAS, BSHAD PA DE LEGS PAR MA MTHONG NGO,,

The fact though is that the Foundational Verses called “Wisdom” uses a much wider variety of reasoning to set forth suchness than does Entering the Middle Way.  As such, this last explanation doesn’t seem so fine to me.


[19]
RANG GI LUGS NI RTZA BA SHES RAB LA ‘JUG PA’I TSUL GNYIS YOD DE, ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I SGO NAS SO, ,DE’I DANG PO NI RANG ‘GREL LAS, ,LUGS ‘DI NI THUN MONG MA YIN PA’O, ,ZHES MKHAS PA RNAMS KYIS NGES PAR BYA’O, ,ZHES PA DANG,

Our own position is that there are two ways in which Master Chandrakirti’s text enters into the Foundational Verses called “Wisdom.”  One is through the profound side of the teachings, and the other is through the widespread side of the teachings.  As for the first, the Autocommentary says that “Sages should understand one thing: that this is a truly unique system.”


[20]
DE NYID MA RTOGS PAS CHOS ZAB MO ‘DI SPANGS PAS, DE’I PHYIR BSTAN BCOS KYIS DE KHO NA NYID PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR BSTAN PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LA ‘JUG PA ‘DI SBYAR BA YIN NO,

It states as well,

They fail to understand suchness, and so they have rejected this profound teaching; as such, I have composed this work, which enters into the classical commentary on the middle way, so that this classical commentary might present suchness in an unerring way.


[21]
ZHES RANG GIS DBU MA’I DON GTAN LA PHAB PA DE, DBU MA PA GZHAN DANG THUN MONG MA YIN PAR BSTAN PA DANG, BSTAN BCOS KYI DON RNAM PAR RIG PA TZAM DANG MTHUN PAR BSHAD DU MI RUNG BA LA NGES PA BSTAN PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA BRTZAMS PAR GSUNGS TE,

What Master Chandrakirti is saying here then is that “I have composed Entering the Middle Way to demonstrate, first of all, why the way that I set forth the meaning of emptiness is truly unique in comparison to the way it is set forth by other proponents of the Middle Way school.  Secondly, I wish to demonstrate how one should come to an understanding that it is mistaken to explain emptiness in the same way as those who belong to the Mentalist School do.”


[22]
TSIG GSAL LAS BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I TSUL DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS SHES PAR BYA BAR GSUNGS SHING, RNAM RIG PA’I LUGS DGAG PA RTZA SHE DANG, TSIG GSAL DU MI RGYAS PA [f. 3b] ‘DIR RGYAS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

After all, A Clarification of the Verses advises us to consult Entering the Middle Way for an explanation of the manner in which things are projected based on a relationship of dependence; and whereas the refutation of the Mentalist School is presented in a detailed way neither in the Foundational Verses called “Wisdom” nor in A Clarification of the Verses, the details of this refutation are to be found here in Entering the Middle Way.


[23]
DE’I PHYIR GZHUNG ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS DGOS PA DE GNYIS KYI SGO NAS RTZA SHE’I DON LEGS PAR NGES PA NI, GZHUNG ‘DIS DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I TSUL GCIG GO ,

Thus we can say that one way in which this work “enters” the “middle way” is that a person can use it to gain a good understanding of the meaning of the Foundational Verses called “Wisdom” through these first two goals of the text.


[24]
RGYA CHE BA’I SGO NAS DBU MA LA ‘JUG TSUL NI, ‘PHAGS PA’I LUGS ‘DIR THEG PA GNYIS LA GNAS PA LA, SHIN TU ZAB PA’I DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA’I SHES RAB YOD MED KYIS MI ‘BYED CING, RTZA SHE LAS ZAB MO’I PHYOGS MA GTOGS PA RGYA CHE BA’I THEG CHEN GYI KHYAD CHOS MA BSTAN KYANG, GZHUNG DE NI THEG PA CHE CHUNG GNYIS KYI NANG NAS, THEG CHEN PA’I DBANG DU MDZAD PA YIN TE,

Here next is how Master Chandrakirti’s text enters the middle way through the widespread side of the teachings.  Here in the system of the Realized One, the distinction of which one of the two ways a person belongs to is not drawn on the basis of whether or not they possess that wisdom which realizes the most profound form of suchness.  Furthermore—although it is true that Wisdom focuses on the profound side of the greater way teachings, and not on the details of the widespread side of these teachings—nonetheless, in examining whether it is a scripture of the greater or lesser way, we must say that it presents the greater way.


[25]
RIGS PA’I RNAM GRANGS MTHA’ YAS PAS CHOS KYI BDAG MED RGYAS PAR BSTAN PA NI, THEG CHEN PA’I GDUL BYA KHO NA’I DBANG DU MDZAD PA’I PHYIR DANG, RTZA SHER YANG DE BZHIN DU BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This is because presenting the lack of a self-nature to things in a detailed way, by using infinite forms of reasoning, is something that is done only with regard to disciples who themselves belong the greater way; and this happens to be exactly how the presentation is done in Wisdom.


[26]
‘DI YANG RANG ‘GREL LAS, CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR THEG PA CHEN PO BSTAN PA YANG RIGS PA NYID DE, RGYAS PAR BSTAN PA BRJOD PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR RO, ,NYAN THOS KYI THEG PA LAS NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA MDOR MTSON PA TZAM ZHIG TU ZAD DO, ,ZHES SHIN TU GSAL BAR GSUNGS TE ‘OG TU ‘CHAD DO,,

This point is also made very clearly in the Autocommentary:

If one wishes to clarify the idea that there is no self-nature to things, then it is uniquely appropriate to present the greater way, since one will want to express the presentation in a very detailed manner.  In the teachings of the way of the listeners, it is sufficient to cover the lack of a self-nature to things in but an abbreviated way.

We will discuss this subject further as we continue through the current text.


[27]
DE LTAR NA GZHUNG DER BSTAN PA’I LAM LA THEG PA CHEN PO’I RGYA CHE BA’I LAM GZHAN ‘PHAGS PA’I MAN NGAG GIS KHA BKANG NA SHIN TU LEGS PAS, DE SKONG BA LA SO SKYE’I SA’I CHOS GSUM DANG, ‘PHAGS PA SLOB PA’I SA BCU DANG, [f. 4a] ‘BRAS BU’I SA DANG, SA LNGA PA DANG DRUG PA’I GO RIM GYIS BSAM GTAN GYI NGO BO ZHI GNAS LA BRTEN NAS, BDAG MED PA GNYIS KYI DE KHO NA NYID LA SO SOR RTOG PA’I SHES RAB KYIS DPYOD PA’I LHAG MTHONG SGOM PA RNAMS GSUNGS SO,,

As such, it is perfect if one supplements the path presented in that scripture with other advices from the Realized One on the widespread path in the teachings of the greater way.  We thus find in the current work descriptions of the three qualities of the levels of common beings; the ten levels of realized beings who are still learning; the level of the goal; and the way in which—at the fifth and sixth bodhisattva levels, respectively—one masters quietude, which is the very essence of deep meditation, and then uses this as a platform from which to meditate upon high insight, wherein one explores suchness in the form of the two different types of the lack of a self-nature, utilizing the wisdom of individual analysis.


[28]
DE’I PHYIR RTZA SHE’I DON YID LA BYED PA’I TSE, ‘JUG PA LAS GSUNGS PA ‘DI RNAMS DRAN NAS ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA GNYIS KA TSOGS PA’I LAM GYI RIM PA YID LA BYED PA MA BYUNG NA, GANG ZAG DE LA DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA BRTZAMS PA’I DGOS PA GNYIS STOR BA YIN NO,,

Suppose then that a person is contemplating the meaning of Arya Nagarjuna’s Wisdom, but fails to bring to mind the steps of the path which combines both the profound & the widespread sides of the teaching, by reflecting upon the points just mentioned as they are presented in Master Chandrakirti’s Entering the Middle Way.  Such a person would then be obviating the entire purpose for which the latter text was composed.


[29]
DE’I PHYIR GZHUNG ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS RTZA SHE’I LAM LA RGYA CHE BA’I SGO NAS ‘JUG PA NI, DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I TSUL GNYIS PA’O,,

Thus we can say that the second way in which Master Chandrakirti’s work enters the middle way is the way in which we can use this text to engage in the path presented in Arya Nagarjuna’s Wisdom through the widespread side of the teachings.



The translators bow down


	[30]
	[translators’ obeisance]
‘JAM DPAL GZHON NUR GYUR PA LA PHYAG ‘TSAL LO,

I bow down to glorious Gentle Voice, become young.


[31]
GNYIS PA NI, TSIG GI DON GO BAR SLA LA, ‘JAM DPAL LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA NI, GZHUNG ‘DI DON DAM	PA’I CHOS MNGON PA RNAM PAR BZHAG PA YIN PAS, SHES RAB KYI BSLAB PA GTZO BOR GYUR PA’I PHYIR, SNGON GYI BKAS BCAD PA DANG MTHUN PAR MDZAD PA’O,,

This brings us to the second section from above: the translator’s obeisance.  The wording of this obeisance is easily understood.  As for bowing down to Gentle Voice, remember that Master Chandrakirti’s work is a presentation of the ultimate form of higher knowledge; and as such it deals primarily with the training of wisdom.  The object of the translator’s obeisance then is selected in keeping with the decree.



Singing the praises of great compassion

[32]
GSUM PA LA BZHI, BSTAN BCOS RTZOM PA LA ‘JUG PA’I THABS MCHOD PAR BRJOD PA, BRTZAMS PA’I BSTAN BCOS KYI LUS DNGOS, BSTAN BCOS JI LTAR BRTZAMS PA’I TSUL, BSTAN BCOS BRTZAMS PA’I DGE BA BSNGO BA’O,,

This brings us to the third section from above—the meaning of the body of the text.  This section itself covers four different topics: the offering of praise, which functions as a means of initiating the composition of this classical commentary; the actual body of the commentary which is then composed; a description of how it was that the commentary was first composed; and a dedication of the virtue of having completed the composition.


[33]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA SO SOR MA PHYE BAR BSTOD PA DANG, SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA SO SOR PHYE STE PHYAG ‘TSAL BA’O,,

The first of these—the offering of praise—has two parts: singing the praises of great compassion without dividing out the components; and bowing down to great compassion while making this division.


[34]
DANG PO NI, DGOS PA [f. 4b] DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LA ‘JUG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU, GANG ZAG DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA RTZOM PAR BZHED PA ZLA BA’I ZHABS KYIS, GZHUNG GZHAN LAS MCHOD BRJOD KYI YUL DU MDZAD PA’I NYAN RANG GNYIS, MCHOD BRJOD KYI YUL DU MA BKOD PAR MA ZAD, 

Here is the first.  Let’s consider the venered Chandrakirti: the person who has agreed to compose the text of Entering the Middle Way, so that we may enter into the Classical Commentary on the Middle Way.  When he writes the traditional offering of praise at the beginning of his work, he decides not to take—as the objects of this praise—the listeners & self-made buddhas which other such classics do make the objects of this offering.


[35]
SANGS RGYAS DANG BYANG SEMS RNAMS LAS KYANG THOG MAR SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYU PHUN SUM TSOGS PA DANG PO, SEMS CAN ‘KHOR BA’I BTZON RAR BSDAMS PA SKYABS MED PA MA LUS PA YONGS SU SKYOB PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN, RGYU’I GTZO BO LA ‘BRAS BU’I MING GIS BTAGS PA’I BCOM LDAN ‘DAS MA, SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA BSTOD BAR ‘OS PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR, NYAN THOS ZHES SOGS TSIGS SU BCAD PA GNYIS SMOS SO,,

And he even goes further: rather than bowing to both the Buddhas & the bodhisattvas, he instead composes the four verses which start with “The listeners…”  The reason that he does so is to indicate that great compassion is a worthy object for us to sing the praises of; for this compassion is the “Lady of Conquest”—this expression itself being a case where we use the name of a result in reference to its principal cause.  This Lady is the first and foremost cause of every Enlightened Being; and her very identity is to be that force which protects, perfectly, each & every living being who is confined in the prison of the cycle of life, bereft of an any savior.


[36]
‘DI LA GNYIS, SNYING RJE BYANG SEMS KYI GTZO BO’I RGYUR BSTAN PA DANG, BYANG SEMS KYI RGYU GZHAN GNYIS KYI YANG RTZA BAR BSTAN PA’O,,

We will cover this compassion in two different sections: describing how it is that compassion is the principal cause of a bodhisattva; and then describing how it is the very root of the other two causes of a bodhisattva as well.



How listeners & self-made buddhas are born
from Enlightened Beings

[37]
DANG PO LA GSUM, NYAN RANG GNYIS THUB DBANG LAS SKYES TSUL DANG, SANGS RGYAS RNAMS BYANG SEMS LAS ‘KHRUNGS TSUL DANG, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I RGYU’I GTZO BO GSUM BSTAN PA’O,,

The first of these itself we will discuss in three parts: how it is that listeners & self-made buddhas are born from the Lords of the Able; how it is that Buddhas take their holy birth from bodhisattvas; and lastly a description of the three principal causes of a bodhisattva.


	[38]
	[I.1]
Munīndrajāḥ śrāvaka madhyabuddhāḥ
sambodhisattva prabhavāś ca Buddhāḥ,
Kāruṇyaceto’dvaya dhīś ca hetuḥ
sambodhicittaṃ ca jinātma jānām.

[I.1a]
,NYAN THOS SANGS RGYAS ‘BRING RNAMS
THUB DBANG SKYES,
,SANGS RGYAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’
LAS ‘KHRUNGS SHING,

The listeners, and the medium Buddhas,	
Are born from the Lords of the Able;
And Buddhas take their holy birth
From the bodhisattvas.


[39]
DANG PO NI, YANG DAG PA’I GDAMS NGAG GZHAN LAS NYAN NAS, BSGOMS PA’I ‘BRAS BU NYAN THOS KYI BYANG CHUB THOB PA NA, DON DE GZHAN LA THOS PAR BYED PAS NA NYAN THOS TE,

Here is the first.  The word “listener” (Tibetan: nyen-tu) here refers to practitioners who listen (nyen) to the perfect teachings from others; use them to attain, as a goal of their meditation, the enlightenment of the listener (nyen-tu) level; and then impart (tu-par je-pa) these points to others.


[40]
THOS PAR BYED TSUL NI ‘DI LTAR BYA BA BYAS SO, ,’DI LAS SRID PA GZHAN MI SHES SO, ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA GSUNG RAB LAS MANG DU ‘BYUNG BA LTAR RO,,

How is it that they “impart” these points?  We see many references in scripture which describe it, reflected in statements such as “I have done what I needed to do; I will know no other suffering existence after this one.”


[41]
SGRA BSHAD ‘DI GZUGS MED KHAMS KYI NYAN THOS [f. 5a] SOGS ‘GA’ ZHIG LA MED KYANG, SKYON MED DE SGRA DNGOS MING DU ‘JUG PA LA SGRA BSHAD PA’I RGYU MTSAN YOD PAS MA KHYAB PA NI,

Now it is true that our literal explanation of this term, “listener,” may not apply in certain cases—for example, with listeners who are living in the formless realm.  This though is not a problem, since it need not always be the case that for a term to apply as a main name for something, its literal explanation applies to that thing.


[42]
DPER NA, SKAM LAS SKYES PA’I PAD MA LA MTSO SKYES KYI SGRA DNGOS MING DU ‘JUG PA BZHIN NO,,

The name “child of the lake,” for example, is applied as a main name even for a lotus which has grown from dry land.


[43]
YANG NA NYAN THOS KYI SKAD DOD SRA BA KA {%SHR’A BA KA} NI THOS SGROGS LA YANG ‘JUG PA LTAR NA, ‘BRAS BU’I MCHOG GAM SANGS RGYAS SU BGROD PA’I LAM, SANGS RGYAS RNAMS LAS THOS NAS THEG PA CHEN PO’I RIGS CAN LAM DE DON DU GNYER BA RNAMS LA SGROG PAR BYED PAS NA NYAN THOS TE, 

Moreover, the Sanskrit original for the word “listener” here is shravaka, which can also refer to “someone who spreads what they have heard.”  In this context, a person is said to be a “listener” when they are someone who hears, from the Buddhas, teachings on the path which leads to the highest goal, or enlightenment—and then spreads these teachings to those people who aspire to this path, and who also belong to the greater-way class of practitioner.


[44]
DAM CHOS PAD DKAR LAS,
,MGON PO DE RING BDAG CAG NYAN THOS GYUR,
,BYANG CHUB DAM PA YANG DAG BSGRAG PAR BGYI,
,BYANG CHUB PA YI SGRA YANG RAB TU BRJOD,
,DE BAS BDAG CAG NYAN THOS MI BZAD ‘DRA,
ZHES GSUNGS TE

As we see in the Holy Teaching of the White Lotus,

O Savior, today we have become the listeners,
And we will spread forever this highest enlightenment;
We will sing out this song of enlightenment—
Thus are we your never-ending listeners. 


[45]
RGYU MTSAN ‘DI GNYIS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LA NI NYAN THOS DANG ‘DRA BA’I RGYU MTSAN YIN LA, NYAN THOS RNAMS LA NI THOS SGROGS KYI DON DNGOS SO,,

In these two senses, listeners are similar to bodhisattvas; but it is the listeners in which the real connotation of “those who spread what they have heard” is complete.


[46]
KHA CIG RKANG PA GSUM PA LA DAM PA’I SGRA MED PAS BYANG CHUB SNGA MA NI THEG CHEN GYI DANG, PHYI MA NI NYAN THOS KYI BYANG CHUB BO ZHES ZER MOD KYANG,

Now we do see those who make the claim that—because the word “highest” is not repeated in the third line of this quotation—the first “enlightenment” mentioned is that of the higher way, whereas the second is that of the listeners.


[47]
DANG PO NI THEG CHEN GYI BYANG CHUB DANG, GNYIS PA NI BYANG CHUB DER BGROD PA’I LAM LA BYED PA ‘GREL PA’I DGONGS PA’O,,

The intent of the commentary at this point though is that the first refers to the enlightenment of the greater way, and the second to the path which leads to this enlightenment.


[48]
BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYANG SANGS RGYAS KYI LAM SANGS RGYAS LAS THOS NAS, GDUL BYA LA SGROG PAS NYAN THOS SU ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NA,

The following question might occur to you: “Bodhisattvas also listen to teachings on the path to Buddhahood from the Buddhas, and spread them to their own disciples; wouldn’t they then also be considered ‘listeners’?”


[49]
NYES PA MED DE LAM DE SGROG PA BYED PA NYID YIN GYI, [f. 5b] RJES SU MTHUN PA TZAM YANG RANG GIS MI SGRUB PAR BSAMS PA YIN PAS SO,,

And yet there’s no such issue.  The idea behind the term “listener” here is that they only spread this path, and fail to actually practice it themselves, in even an approximate way.



What is a “medium Buddha”?

[50]
SANGS RGYAS ‘BRING ZHES PA’I SANGS RGYAS NI, ‘GREL PAR SANGS RGYAS KYI DE NYID GANG ZAG GSUM CHAR LA ‘JUG STE, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NI, KHA CIG TA TVA BUD DDH’A ZHES PA’I SGRA GANG ZAG GSUM GA LA ‘JUG PAR ‘CHAD PA LTAR LEGS TE,

Let’s turn our attention to the expression “medium Buddhas,” found in Master Chandrakirti’s lines here.  The commentary says that “the nature of a Buddha applies to all three levels of practitioner”—let us examine just what this means.  Some have explained it by saying that the Sanskrit term tattva buddha applies to all three, and in my opinion this is a good approach.


[51]
TA TVA NI DE KHO NA NYID DO, ,BUD DHA KHONG DU CHUD PA LA’O, ZHES ‘BYUNG BA LTAR DE NYID RTOGS PA BUD DDHA’I SGRA’I DON DU BYAS PA’I TSE, DON DE GANG ZAG GSUM GA LA YOD PAS, DE NYID RTOGS PA’I SGRAS RANG SANGS RGYAS KYANG BSNYAD CES ZER RGYU YIN PA LA, SANGS RGYAS SU BSGYUR RO,,

As they say, “tattva means suchness”; and “buddha means to comprehend.”  Following this, we can take the literal meaning of the word buddha to mean the perception of thusness.  This connotation applies to practitioners of all three levels; and so we can say that the expression “one who perceives thusness” applies to self-made buddhas as well—meaning then that they are buddhas.


[52]
SPYIR BUDDHA’I SGRA SANGS RGYAS LA BSGYUR DU YOD KYANG, SKABS ‘DIR MI ‘TSAM MO, ,BUDDHA’I SGRA NI PAD ‘DAB RGYAS PA DANG, GNYID SAD PA LA YANG ‘JUG PAR BSHAD PAS SANGS RGYAS KHO NA LA BSGYUR MI DGOS SO,,

Generally speaking, the word buddha can be translated as Enlightened Being; but the present context is different.  Recall those explanations which say that this term, buddha, can apply as well to the opening of the petals of a lotus; or to awakening from a state of sleep.  As such, it need not always be translated as Enlightened Being.


[53]
‘BRING GI DON NI, RANG RGYAL RNAMS NI BSKAL PA BRGYAR BSOD NAMS DANG YE SHES STAN {%BSTEN} PA GONG DU ‘PHEL BA’I KHYAD PAR GYIS, NYAN THOS LAS KHYAD PAR DU ‘PHAGS SHING,

How are we to understand the word “medium” here?  The practice of both merit & wisdom by self-made buddhas expands for the length of a hundred eons; and it is this difference which makes them infinitely superior to the listeners.


[54]
BSOD NAMS DANG YE SHES KYI TSOGS GNYIS DANG, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LA DUS THAMS CAD DU ‘JUG PA’I THUGS RJE CHEN PO DANG, RNAM PA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA SOGS MED PAS RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS LAS DMAN PAS ‘BRING PO’O,,

These self-made buddhas are, though, inferior to fully enlightened Buddhas in that they lack the two accumulations of merit & wisdom; that great compassion which embraces all living beings in all times; omniscience, and other such qualities.  As such we can call them “medium” Buddhas.


[55]
KHA CIG NYAN THOS LAS YE SHES LHAG PA’I DON, GZUNG DON RTOG PA SPONG PHYIR DANG, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR YIN ZHES SMRA BA NI

Now some have asserted that when we say that the wisdom of the self-made buddhas exceeds that of the listeners, we are following the distinction made in the line which says, “They have eliminated this idea about the objects which are grasped by their perceptions.”


[56]
MI RIGS TE, LUGS [f. 6a] ‘DIR CHOS THAMS CAD RANG BZHIN MED PAR RTOGS PA NYAN RANG GNYIS KA LA YOD PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, DE SKAD SMRA BA DES KYANG GRUB MTHA’ DE ‘DOD PAR ‘DUG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This though is a mistaken opinion, since it is taught in the current system that both listeners & self-made buddhas possess the realization that nothing has any nature of its own.  In fact, even the person who wrote that line was someone who followed this system.


[57]
DES NA ‘GREL PAR YE SHES GONG DU ‘PHEL BA LHAG PAR GSUNGS LA, GONG DU ‘PHEL BA NI, LAM GYI BGROD PA GONG NAS GONG DU JE BZANG DU ‘GRO BA’O,,

Thus it is that the commentary speaks of how “the wisdom, which has expanded,” is something more.  The meaning of “expanded” here is that the journey of these self-made buddhas upon the path has gotten better & better.


[58]
DE YANG BSKAL PA BRGYAR BSOD NAMS DANG YE SHES LA GOMS PA LHUR LEN PA YIN GYI, NYAN THOS LTAR LAM LA GOMS PA SRID MI NUS PA MIN PA’O,,

This expansion refers to their habituation to the practices of merit & wisdom over the period of these hundred eons; it is not meant to imply that it is not possible that their habituation to the path might come in the form that it takes for listeners.


[59]
BSOD NAMS DANG YE SHES SPYI LA TSOGS KYI SGRA TZAM ‘JUG PA YOD KYANG, TSOGS KYI SGRA ‘JUG PA’I GTZO BO NI, ‘GREL PA DON GSAL LAS, 

The word “accumulation,” in only its usual sense, can be used to apply to merit & wisdom in general.  Nonetheless, the primary application of the term is, rather, how we see it described in A Commentary which Clarifies the Meaning:


[60]
YANG DAG PAR ‘GRUB PA’I NGO BOS BYANG CHUB CHEN PO ‘DZIN PAR BYED PA’I PHYIR NA, SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA SOGS PA NI TSOGS YIN PAS,

Qualities such as great compassion are considered “accumulated” insofar as the very nature of their proper practice is that they bring one to embrace the great enlightenment.


[61]
ZHES BLA NA MED PA’I BYANG CHUB PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR SGRUB PA’I THABS KYIS, ‘BRAS BUR ‘DZIN PA LA GSUNGS PA LTAR GYI DON TSANG BA’I BSOD NAMS DANG YE SHES SO, ,DON DE MA TSANG BA GNYIS NI TSOGS PHAL PA’O,,

We can thus say that the principal reference of the word “accumulation” is to merit & wisdom in a form in which the stated elements are complete: where they serve as a method of attaining matchless enlightenment in a way which is flawless, leading one to embrace the final goal.  In any case where these elements are not complete, we can only refer to them as “accumulated” in an ordinary sense of the term.


[62]
‘DI YANG TSOGS KYI SKAD DOD SAm BHA RA LA NGES TSIG GIS BSHAD PA’I DON NO,,

This is in fact the meaning of the original Sanskrit word for “accumulation”—sambhara—when it is explained in a literal way.


[63]
BSOD NAMS DANG YE SHES KYI BGROD PA NYAN THOS LAS CHES LHAG PA’I PHYIR, ‘DOD PA KHAMS SU YANG SRID PA THA MA PA’I TSE, SLOB DPON GZHAN GYIS BSTAN PA LA MI LTOS PAR DGRA BCOM PA’I YE SHES SKYED NUS SHING, DE YANG RANG GCIG PU’I PHYIR SANGS RGYAS PA STE [f. 6b] DGRA BCOM THOB PA DANG THOB PAR BYED PAS NA, RANG SANGS RGYAS ZHES BYA BA RANG BYUNG ZHES KYANG GSUNGS SO,,

Why exactly do we refer to them as “self-made buddhas” (or, as is sometimes seen, “the self-born”)?  It is because—in their final incarnation in the desire realm—these practitioners are able to give rise within themselves to the wisdom of an enemy destroyer, without relying upon the teachings of any other master; and because they have either attained or are working to attain “Buddhahood” (here referring to the state of an enemy destroyer), all for themselves.  And all of this is possible precisely because they have journeyed vastly farther in merit & wisdom than the listeners.


[64]
THUB PA’I SGRA NI NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM LA YANG ‘JUG MOD KYANG, THUB PA’I DBANG PO MIN PAS SANGS RGYAS NYID LA THUB PA’I DBANG PO ZHES BYA STE, NYAN RANG DANG BYANG SEMS RNAMS LAS KYANG GONG NA MED PA’I CHOS KYI DBANG PHYUG DAM PA BRNYES PA DANG, GANG ZAG GSUM PO DE SANGS RGYAS KYI BKAS CHOS KYI SRID LA MNGA’ SGYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now admittedly the term “able one” can be used with reference to enemy destroyers of both the listener or the self-made buddha type; these practitioners though are not “Lords of the Able,” and so it is only an Enlightened Being to whom we can refer with this expression.  This is because an Enlightened Being has attained an eminent lordship of the teachings which is higher than any of that reached by any listener or self-made buddha—or even by any normal bodhisattva.  Moreover, practitioners of all three of these types are invested in their power over the kingdom of the teachings precisely by the command of the Enlightened Ones.


[65]
THUB DBANG DE RNAMS LAS NYAN RANG RNAMS SKYES PA NI DE DAG GIS BSKRUN PA’O,,

And when we say that the listeners & self-made buddhas are “born” from these Lords of the Able, what we are saying is that these Lords have produced them.


[66]
THUB DBANG GIS NYAN RANG BSKRUN TSUL JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA, SANGS RGYAS ‘JIG RTEN DU BYON PA NA RTEN ‘BREL ZAB MO PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR STON PA LA ‘JUG LA, TSUL DE NYAN RANG GI RIGS CAN RNAMS KYIS NYAN PA DANG, THOS PA’I DON SEMS PA DANG, BSAMS PA’I DON SGOM PAR ‘GYUR LA,

One might ask just how it is that the Lords of the Able do this “producing” of the listeners and the self-made.  When an Enlightened Being comes to a planet, they engage in teaching—unerringly—the profound instructions upon dependent events.  Practitioners who are attracted to the paths of the listener and self-made buddha then listen to these teachings; and contemplate upon what they have heard; and meditate upon the conclusions reached in their contemplations.


[67]
DE ‘DRA BA’I RIM PA LAS KYANG RANG ‘BRAS BU GANG LA MOS PA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU NYAN RANG GNYIS KYI ‘DOD PA RDZOGS PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR, DE GNYIS THUB DBANG GIS BSKRUN PA’O,,

They begin to feel an aspiration towards certain goals of this process—that is, for either the goal of the listener or that of the self-made buddha—and in time their wishes are fulfilled.  And thus it is that we can say that they have been “produced” by the Lords of the Able.


[68]
GAL TE NYAN THOS KYI RIGS CAN MANG POS SANGS RGYAS LAS CHOS THOS PA’I TSE DE NYID LA BYANG CHUB MNGON DU BYED KYANG, RANG RGYAL GYI RIGS CAN RNAMS KYIS TSE DE NYID LA RANG GI BYANG CHUB MNGON DU MI BYED PAS, DE DAG GIS THUB PAS GSUNGS PA’I DON LA THOS BSAM SGOM GSUM BYAS PAS RANG GI ‘DOD PA RDZOGS PA MI ‘THAD DO SNYAM NA,

The following question might then occur to a person:

A great many practitioners of the listener type listen to teachings from the Buddhas, and then in that same life attain their enlightenment.  Those of the self-made buddha type though fail to reach their enlightenment in that same life; and so it is incorrect to characterize them as having employed the three-fold process of learning, contemplation, and meditation upon what the Able Ones have said to them, and thus fulfilled their particular wishes.


[69]
SKYON MED DE, GAL TE RANG RGYAL GYI RIGS CAN KHA CIG ,STON PAS [f. 7a] 
RTEN ‘BREL GSUNGS PA NYAN PA KHO NA LAS, DON DAM PA RTOGS PA LA MKHAS PA BYUNG YANG, CHOS THOS PA’I MTHONG CHOS KYI SKYE BA DE KHO NA LA, RANG RGYAL GYI MYANG ‘DAS MI ‘THOB MOD KYANG,

This though is not an issue.  It is admittedly the case that certain practitioners of the self-made buddha type might only listen to instructions granted by the Teacher upon dependent events, and thus attain some mastery in the perception of the ultimate—but still fail to attain the nirvana of a self-made buddha in nothing more than the lifetime in which they heard the teaching, as what we refer to as “something seen in the same life.”


[70]
SANGS RGYAS KYIS RTEN ‘BREL BSTAN PA’I RANG RGYAL GYI SGRUB PA POS, MYONG NGES KYI LAS BSAGS PAS LAS SOG PA’I TSE DE NYID LA ‘BRAS BU MA MYONG YANG, SKYE BA GZHAN DU NGES PAR MYONG BA LTAR,

Nonetheless, a practitioner of the self-made buddha type who receives teachings on dependent events from an Enlightened Being collects karma of the kind which is “certain to be experienced”; and so even though they may not experience the attainment of the goal in the very same life in which they collected this karma, it is certain that they will have this experience in another lifetime.


[71]
TSE ‘DIR MYANG ‘DAS MA THOB KYANG, TSE RABS GZHAN DU NGES PA KHO NAR MYANG ‘DAS ‘THOB PA’I PHYIR DANG, SNGAR SANGS RGYAS KYIS CHOS BSTAN PA LA NYAN BSAM BSGOM GSUM BYAS PAS, ‘DOD PA RDZOGS PAR BSHAD PA NI TSE DE KHO NA LA BSAMS NAS BSHAD PA MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Just so, it is totally certain that these practitioners will attain nirvana in one of their lifetimes to come, even if they do not achieve it in this particular life.  And when we say that they go through the three-fold process of learning, contemplating, and meditating upon the teachings that they have received previously from Enlightened Beings—and thus see their wishes fulfilled—it is not the case that we are speaking of all this having occurred only in that one particular life.


[72]
DE LTAR YANG BZHI BRGYA PA LAS,
,DE NYID SHES PAS GAL TE ‘DIR,
,MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA MA THOB KYANG,
,SKYE BA GZHAN DU ‘BAD MED PAR,
,NGES PAR THOB ‘GYUR LAS BZHIN NO,
ZHES DANG,

The 400 Verses concurs when it says,

Once a person has known suchness,
Then—even if they fail to attain
Nirvana here & now—

They are certain to attain it effortlessly
Within another life; it’s like
The case with that kind of karma.


[73]
DBU MA LAS KYANG,
,RDZOGS SANGS RGYAS RNAMS MA BYUNG ZHING,
,NYAN THOS RNAMS KYANG ZAD PA NA,
,RANG SANGS RGYAS KYI YE SHES NI,
,RTEN PA MED PAR RAB TU ‘BYUNG,
,ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The Middle Way states as well,

Fully enlightened Buddhas
May be yet to come,
And all the listeners
May be already gone,

But the wisdom
Of a self-made buddha
Will still rise forth,
Depending on no one.


[74]
‘GREL PAR GAL TE YANG KHA CIG CES SOGS KYI DON LA, ,KHA CIG RTEN ‘BREL BSTAN YANG NYAN THOS LA SOGS PA’I GO ‘PHANG MA THOB PA SNANG BAS, RTEN ‘BREL BSTAN PAS NYAN THOS LA SOGS PA RNAMS YONGS SU RDZOGS PAR MI ‘GYUR RO, ZHES PA’I LAN BSTAN PAR ‘DOD PA [f. 7b] DANG,

Some people have stated that the lines in The Commentary which include “Now it is admittedly the case that some practitioners…” are meant to express an answer to other people who say, “We can see cases where practitioners are taught dependent events, but still fail to attain the state of a listener or whatever else the case may be.  As such it cannot be said that listeners & the rest are fulfilled through receiving teachings on dependent events.”


[75]
GZHAN DAG RTEN ‘BREL SKYE MED KYI DON NYAMS SU BLANGS MA THAG TU ‘BRAS BU DE ‘BYUNG RIGS PA LAS, DE MED PAS NA, PHYIS KYANG ‘BRAS BU DE MI SKYED DO ZHES PA’I LAN STON PAR ‘CHAD PA NI,

Others have explained this section as expressing a reply to someone asserting that “It would make sense if these practitioners reached their particular goal immediately after putting into practice the teachings on dependent events, in the sense of nothing in the world ever starting.  And yet they do not; and so neither do they make these goals come about later.”


[76]
SKABS KYI DON MA RTOGS PA’I BSHAD PA STE, THUB DBANG GIS RANG RGYAL BSKRUN TSUL LA DOGS PA CHE BAS DE LA DMIGS KYIS BKAR NAS, DOGS PA GCAD DGOS PA MA BCAD PAR ‘DUG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Both of these explanations though reflect a failure to grasp the point of the context of the work at this particular juncture.  The idea is that serious questions could arise in a reader’s mind about just how it is that the Lords of the Able produce self-made buddhas; and so this question needs to be isolated and resolved—whereas those proposed treatments of the section fail to offer such a resolution.



How Buddhas take their holy birth
	from bodhisattvas

[77]
GNYIS PA NI, NYAN RANG GNYIS THUB DBANG LAS SKYES PA YIN NA, THUB PA’I DBANG PO DE RNAMS GANG LAS BLTAMS SHE NA, RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS NI BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LAS ‘KHRUNGS PA YIN NO,,

Here is the second point from above, on how it is that Buddhas take their holy birth from bodhisattvas.  One may ask the following question: “If listeners & self-made buddhas are born from the Lords of the Able, from whom then do these Lords take their own holy birth?”  The totally enlightened Buddhas take their holy birth from the bodhisattvas.


[78]
GAL TE BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYANG SANGS RGYAS KYIS NYE BAR BSTAN PA LAS SKYES PAS, RGYAL BA’I SRAS ZHES BRJOD PA MA YIN NAM, RGYAL BA’I SRAS YIN PA DE’I PHYIR, SANGS RGYAS RNAMS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LAS ‘KHRUNGS PA JI LTAR RIGS TE, DPER NA BU’I PHA NI BU DE LAS SKYES PA MI RIGS PA BZHIN NO ZHE NA,

One may pose the following question:

Isn’t it though also the case bodhisattvas are born from being taught by the Buddhas?  They are after all referred to as “the daughters & sons of the Buddhas.”  And if it is true that they are the “children of the Buddhas,” how then can it be correct to say that Buddhas are born from the bodhisattvas?  It would be wrong to say, for example, that the father of a child were born from that child.


[79]
BYANG SEMS RNAMS RGYAL BA ‘GA’ ZHIG GI SRAS YIN PA NI BDEN MOD KYI, ‘ON KYANG RGYU MTSAN GNYIS KYIS BYANG SEMS RNAMS SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI RGYUR ‘GYUR RO,,

It’s true that bodhisattvas are the children of particular Victors; and yet still bodhisattvas are the causes of the Buddhas, for two different reasons.


[80]
DE LA GNAS SKABS KYI KHYAD PAR LAS BYANG SEMS RNAMS SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI RGYUR ‘GYUR TSUL NI, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I GNAS SKABS NI BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I GNAS SKABS KYI ‘BRAS BU YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Bodhisattvas are causes of the Buddhas in the sense of the periods in a person’s spiritual evolution; that is, the period in which one is a Buddha is the outcome of the period in which one is a bodhisattva.


[81]
‘DIS NI SANGS RGYAS KYI GNAS SKABS THOB PA GANG YIN THAMS CAD, [f. 8a] SNGON SLOB LAM DU BYANG SEMS KYI GNAS SKABS SU GYUR PA KHO NAS THOB PA YIN NO, ZHES SANGS RGYAS DANG RGYUD GCIG PA’I BRGYUD PA’I NYER LEN GYI RGYU’I SGO NAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYUR BSTAN NO,,

The wording here is meant to indicate that bodhisattvas are the cause of Buddhas in the sense of being the material cause which transforms into the Buddha who follows them, as a continuation of the same mind stream: “Each & every one who has reached the period in which one has already become a Buddha had to do so by going first through the period in which they were a bodhisattva on the path of those who still have more to learn.”


[82]
YANG DAG PAR ‘DZIN DU ‘JUG PA LAS BYANG SEMS SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYUR ‘GYUR TSUL NI, RJE BTZUN ‘JAM DPAL BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAR GYUR PA NYID KYIS, BDAG CAG GI STON PA DANG, DE LAS GZHAN PA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS CHES THOG MA KHO NAR BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS ‘DZIN DU BCUG PAR MDO SDE LAS ‘DON PA YIN NO,,

There is also a way of describing how bodhisattvas are the causes of Buddhas by virtue of “inducing them to make the perfect commitment.”  This we see in descriptions from the sutras, in incidents which took place in the infinitely distant past, where the holy Gentle Voice—in a form where he was nothing more than a bodhisattva—induced our own Teacher, and other Buddhas as well, to make the commitment to the Wish for enlightenment.


[83]
‘DIS NI BYANG SEMS GZHAN GYIS THOB BYA’I SANGS RGYAS DANG, RGYUD THA DAD PA’I BYANG SEMS KYIS SANGS RGYAS DE’I LHAN CIG BYED RKYEN BYAS PA’I SGO NAS, SANGS RGYAS BYANG SEMS LAS ‘KHRUNGS PAR SGRUB PA YIN NO,,

This then would be a case where the holy birth of a Buddha from a bodhisattva was accomplished in such a way that the bodhisattva acted as a contributing cause for a particular Buddha: the bodhisattva who did this was a separate person from the bodhisattva who would later attain their own Buddhahood.


[84]
‘DIR PHYOGS SNGA MA SMRA BAS, BYANG SEMS RNAMS RGYAL BA’I SRAS YIN PAS, BYANG SEMS RGYAL BA LAS ‘KHRUNGS PA RIGS KYI, DE LAS BZLOG NAS SMRA BA MI RIGS ZHES BRTZAD PA LA,

At this point, a person who had raised the original issue might persist, expressing the following thought:

An argument has been raised which says that—since bodhisattvas are the “sons & daughters” of the victorious Buddhas—it makes sense to say that bodhisattvas are born from the Victorious Ones; but that asserting the reverse does not.


[85]
BYANG SEMS RGYAL BA’I SRAS YIN PA BDEN MOD KYI, ZHES RANG YANG DE LTAR BZHED PAR BSTAN PA NA, DE KHAS LEN KYANG BYANG SEMS LAS SANGS RGYAS ‘KHRUNGS PA MI ‘GAL BA’I RGYU MTSAN BSTAN DGOS PA MA BSTAN PAR,

In response to this argument, you have said that “It is admittedly true that bodhisattvas are the children of the Victors”—indicating that you also accept this fact.  Having accepted this though, you should have followed up by giving us some reason why it isn’t then contradictory to say that Buddhas take their holy birth from bodhisattvas.  And yet you failed to do so.


[86]
BYANG SEMS LAS SANGS RGYAS ‘KHRUNGS PAR SGRUB PA MI RIGS TE, DE LTAR BSGRUBS PA LA YANG DA DUNG DOGS PA SNGA MA SKYE BAS, [f. 8b] DOGS PA DE MI CHOD PA’I PHYIR RO SNYAM NA,

As such it remains the case that it is wrong to assert that Buddhas take their holy birth from bodhisattvas; for even if you persist in doing so, the same question that we expressed before must be raised—you have done nothing to resolve this issue in our minds.


[87]
SKYON ‘DI MED DE BYANG SEMS LAS SANGS RGYAS ‘KHRUNGS PAR RTZA BAR BSTAN PA’I DON NI, RGYU MTSAN DANG PO’I SKABS SU SLOB LAM GYI BYANG SEMS KYIS, LAM NYAMS SU BLANGS PA LAS ‘BRAS BU SANGS RGYAS THOB PA LA BSHAD PA NA, BYANG SEMS DES THOB PA’I SANGS RGYAS KYI SRAS BYANG SEMS DE MIN PAR SHES PAS, DE LA BDEN MOD KYI ZHES ZER BA GA LA YIN,

And yet there is no such problem.  When the root text states that Buddhas take their holy birth from bodhisattvas, it’s understood that—in the context of the first way that they do so—when we speak of a bodhisattva who is on a path where they are still learning and who undertakes a practice of the spiritual path and then attains the goal of becoming a Buddha, then we are not saying that the bodhisattva who turned into the Buddha is the child of that particular Buddha.  As such we would obviously not be referring to this particular bodhisattva and Buddha when we say “It is admittedly true” that bodhisattvas are children of the Buddhas.


[88]
YANG BDAG CAG GI STON PA’I GSUNG LAS GSAR DU BYANG SEMS SU SKYES PA DE, SANGS RGYAS DE’I SRAS YIN KYANG BYANG SEMS DE LAS, SANGS RGYAS DE ‘KHRUNGS PA MIN PAS RTZOD PA DE NI TSUL DE GNYIS RNAM PAR MA PHYED PA’I RTZOD PAR, ‘GREL PAS LAN BTAB PA LA BRTEN NAS, SHES RAB YOD NA CI’I PHYIR MI RTOGS, DE LTAR NA’ANG ‘DI LA YANG SNYING PO MED PA’I BSHAD PA MANG DU BYUNG SNANG NGO,

Consider furthermore a case where a particular practitioner has been given birth as a new bodhisattva by following the words of the Teacher.  They are then a “child” of this particular Buddha, but it is not the case that this same Buddha has taken their holy birth from this particular bodhisattva.  How on earth then could anyone with any intelligence at all fail to grasp, by reviewing the answer given in the commentary, that the argument raised here represents a failure to distinguish between these two different ways in which a Buddha could take their holy birth from a bodhisattva?  Nonetheless, we do see a great many pointless discussions of this issue being offered.


[89]
BYANG SEMS RNAMS SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYU’I GTZO BO YIN PA DE NYID KYI PHYIR, SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS BYANG SEMS LA BSNGAGS PA MDZAD PA YIN NO ZHES SBYAR RO,,

What the author then is saying here is that “For precisely the reason that bodhisattvas represent the primary cause of Buddhas, the Buddhas themselves sing the praises of the bodhisattvas.”


[90]
BSNGAGS PA MDZAD PA’I DGOS PA BZHI LAS, DANG PO NI, SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYU PHUN TSOGS NI CHES BRLING BA STE SHIN TU GCES PA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

There are four reasons why it is necessary for these praises to be sung.  First of all, the most excellent cause of the Buddhas is “far beyond our ken”—here meaning “something we should cherish deeply.”


[91]
GNYIS PA NI, RGYU BYANG SEMS LA MCHOD PAR BRJOD PA LAS KYANG, ‘BRAS BU SANGS RGYAS LA MCHOD PA SHUGS KYIS ‘PHANGS PAR DGONGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Secondly, the author intends for us to understand that—by making an offering of praise to the cause (that is, to the bodhisattvas)—he is by implication making offerings to the result: to the Buddhas.


[92]
GSUM PA NI, SMAN GYI LJON SHING ‘DOD PA’I ‘BRAS BU DPAG TU MED PA STER BA’I SHING GI MYU GU DANG SDONG BU LA [f. 9a] SOGS PA MTHONG ZHING, SHING GI LO MA GZHON PA ‘JAM PO’I GNAS SKABS SU, LHAG PAR YANG GCES SPRAS SU BYAS TE SKYONG BA BZHIN DU,

Think, thirdly, about the point at which we first spot the sprout, and then the trunk & the rest, of a medicinal tree from which we can expect an infinite number of luscious fruits.  It is at this point—when the leaves of the tree are still young and soft—that we cherish the tree the most, and do our best to protect it.


[93]
SANGS RGYAS KYI LJON SHING SKYE DGU THAMS CAD KYI GSOS SU GYUR PA’I MYU GU BYANG SEMS LAS DANG PO PA LA YANG GCES SPRAS SU BYAS TE, ‘BAD PA CHEN POS BSKYANG BAR BYA BAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,, 

The author wishes to express the thought that we should appreciate the small sprout of those neophyte bodhisattvas, which will grow into the medicinal tree of a Buddha, and thus become the sustenance of each & every living being there is; and we should expend every effort to protect this tiny sprout.


[94]
BZHI PA NI, BYANG SEMS LA BSNGAGS PA GSUNG BA’I DUS DER ‘KHOR DU NYE BAR GYUR CING, THEG PA GSUM LA BKOD PA RNAMS THEG CHEN NYID LA NGES PAR SBYAR BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Fourth, the author hopes to guide those who were close at hand at the actual point when he expressed his praise of the bodhisattvas, and those who were already upon some one of the three different ways, to the greater way alone.


[95]
DKON MCHOG BRTZEGS PA’I MDO LAS KYANG, ‘OD SRUNGS ‘DI LTA STE, DPER NA ZLA BA TSES PA LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA LTAR NYA BA LA MA YIN NO, ,’OD SRUNGS DE BZHIN DU GANG DAG NGA LA RAB TU DAD PA DE DAG GIS, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS LA PHYAG BYA’I, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS LA NI DE LTAR MA YIN NO,,

As a sutra within The Pile of Jewels also says,

O Protector the Light, this is how it is.  To use an analogy, we do not honor the full moon in the same way that we do the waxing moon.  Just so, o Protector of the Light, those who possess the highest devotion for me should bow to the bodhisattvas in a way that they do not do even to Those Who Have Gone That Way.


[96]
DE CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LAS NI DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS ‘BYUNG NGO, ,DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS LAS NI NYAN THOS DANG RANG SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD ‘BYUNG NGO, ,ZHES GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

Why is this the case?  It is because Those Gone That Way come from the bodhisattvas; and from Those Thus Gone come all the listeners & self-made buddhas.


[97]
‘DIS NI SANGS RGYAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LAS ‘KHRUNGS PAR LUNG GIS BSGRUBS LA, RGYU MTSAN SNGA MA GNYIS KYIS NI RIGS PAS BSGRUBS SO,,

This statement by the way serves to prove, through the use of authoritative scripture, the fact that Enlightened Beings take their holy birth from bodhisattvas; whereas the two reasons given before serve to prove this fact through logical reasoning.


[98]
DE LTAR NA GZHAN LAS MCHOD BRJOD KYI YUL DU GRAGS PA’I NYAN RANG GNYIS DANG, SANGS RGYAS DANG BYANG SEMS LA ‘DIR DNGOS SU MCHOD BRJOD [f. 9b] MA MDZAD PA NI, DE RNAMS KYI RTZA BA’I RGYU LA MCHOD BRJOD BYED PA YIN LA,

As such, the reason that here in this context we make an offering of praise not to the two of the listeners & the self-made buddhas, nor to the Buddhas or bodhisattvas—at least, not directly—is that we are making this offering to their root cause. 


[99]
DE BZHI RIM PA BZHIN RGYU ‘BRAS SU, NYAN THOS ZHES PA’I RKANG PA GNYIS KYIS BSTAN PA NI, DE RNAMS KYI MTHAR GTUGS PA’I RTZA BA’I RGYU NGOS GZUNG BA’I PHYIR DU YIN NO,,

The four lines of the text which start with “The listeners…” indicate how these four represent a chain of cause & effect; and this is done all for the purpose of identifying the thing which serves as their ultimate root cause.


[100]
DE LTA NA SANGS RGYAS KYIS NYE BAR BSTAN PA LAS, BYANG SEMS SKYE BA YIN KYANG, THUB DBANG SKYES ZHES PA’I SKABS SU, DE LA NYAN RANG LTAR BSHAD MI DGOS TE, DE GNYIS THUB DBANG LAS SKYES PAR STON PA NI, DE GNYIS KYI RTZA BA YANG MTHAR GTUGS NA, SNYING RJE LA THUG PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR YIN LA, BYANG SEMS KYI RTZA BA SNYING RJE LA THUG PA NI LOGS SU STON PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is then the case that bodhisattvas are born from receiving teachings from the Buddhas; nonetheless, we need not explain their birth in the way that we do with the listeners & self-made buddhas in the part about being “born from the Lords of the Able.”  When we demonstrate how these two are born from the Lords of the Able, we are also saying that—ultimately—their very root traces back to compassion; and then we continue on to show separately how it is that the root of a bodhisattva traces back to this same compassion.



The causes of a bodhisattva

[101]
GSUM PA NI, GAL TE NYAN RANG GNYIS THUB DBANG LAS DANG, THUB DBANG RNAMS BYANG SEMS LAS ‘KHRUNGS NA, BYANG SEMS DE DAG GI RGYU GANG YIN ZHE NA,

This brings us to the third section from above: a description of the three principal causes of a bodhisattva.  We may begin with the following question: “Given that both the listeners and the self-made buddhas are born from the Lords of the Able; and that these Lords themselves take their holy birth from the bodhisattvas; what then is it that serves as the cause of those bodhisattvas?”


	[102]
	[I.1b]
,SNYING RJE’I SEMS DANG GNYIS SU MED BLO DANG,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS NI RGYAL SRAS RNAMS KYI RGYU,

The causes which create
These children of the Victors
Are the attitude of compassion;
A state of mind beyond duality;
And the Wish for enlightenment.


[103]
‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA’I SNYING RJE’I SEMS DANG, DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS PO MED PA LA SOGS PA’I MTHA’ GNYIS SU MED PA STE GNYIS DANG BRAL BA’I DON RTOGS PA’I BLO SHES RAB DANG BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS GSUM NI, RGYAL SRAS BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYI GTZO BO’I RGYU YIN NO,,

The principal causes which create these children of the Victors—the bodhisattvas—are three, all of which we will be explaining here in our text: the attitude of compassion; wisdom, referring to the state of mind with which we grasp that object which is “beyond duality” (meaning devoid of two typical extremes, such as being a thing or not being anything); and the Wish for enlightenment.


[104]
BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS NI ‘DIR ‘GREL PAR MDO DRANGS PA LAS BSTAN PA BZHIN YIN ZHES GSUNGS LA, MDO LAS NI, RANG GIS CHOS KYI DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS NAS, CHOS NYID ‘DI SEMS CAN RNAMS KYIS KHONG DU CHUD PAR BYA’O SNYAM NAS, SEMS GANG SKYES PA DE NI BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS ZHES BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

Here the Wish for enlightenment is explained in the commentary as being the way it is described in a citation from sutra.  This is how the scripture words it:

What is this thing that we call “the Wish for enlightenment”?  It is a state of mind where we ourselves first come to a realization of the suchness of all things, and then have the thought, “I will work to see that each & every living being comes to grasp this way that all things are.”


[105]
‘DI NI [f. 10a] SEMS BSKYED KYI CHED DU BYA BA’I PHYOGS GCIG TZAM LA DMIGS PA YIN PAS MTSAN NYID MA RDZOGS LA, YANG ‘GREL PAR BDAG GIS ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI MTHA’ DAG SDUG BSNGAL NAS BTON TE, SANGS RGYAS NYID LA NGES BAR SBYAR BAR BYA’O SNYAM DU NGES PAR SEMS SKYED PAR BYED DO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LA YANG THOB BYA BYANG CHUB LA DMIGS PA MED PAS MTSAN NYID PHYOGS GCIG PA’O,,

This description of the Wish focuses upon only one part of its intended purpose, and so cannot be considered a comprehensive definition of it.  The following description from the Commentary also lacks an element of the full definition—where we ourselves are intent upon reaching enlightenment:

One should quite certainly develop the Wish for enlightenment, where you think to yourself: “I will rescue this entire world from pain, and without any doubt guide them to nothing less than Buddhahood.”


[106]
DES NA ‘GREL PAR SNYING RJE LA BRTEN NAS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SKYE BAR STON PA’I SKABS SU, DAM PA’I CHOS KYI BDUD RTZI’I RO PHUL DU BYUNG BA ‘BYUNG BA’I RGYU, PHYIN CI LOG GI RTOG PA MTHA’ DAG LOG PA’I MTSAN NYID, ‘GRO BA YONGS KYI GNYEN NYID KYI RANG BZHIN DU GYUR PA, SANGS RGYAS NYID YANG DAG PAR THOB PAR ‘DOD PA YIN NO, ZHES THOB BYA’I BYANG CHUB LA DMIGS PA GSAL BAR BSHAD PAS,

Nonetheless, this element of our being intent upon reaching enlightenment ourselves does receive separate attention in the section of the commentary where Master Chandrakirti describes how the Wish for enlightenment is developed by relying upon compassion:

We aspire to achieving, perfectly, nothing less than Buddhahood itself: that source from which the exquisite flavor of the nectar of the holy teachings flows; that being with whom, by their very essence, all misperceptions are turned away; that one who is, by their own nature, the one friend of every single living creature.


[107]
CHED DU BYA BA SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON DU THOB BYA BLA NA MED PA’I BYANG CHUB THOB PAR ‘DOD PA SEMS BSKYED KYI MTSAN NYID RDZOGS PAR ‘DOD PAR BYA STE,

Thus we can say that what we accept as the full definition of the Wish for enlightenment is: “The desire to attain the goal of matchless enlightenment for the sake of every living being.”


[107]
‘GREL BSHAD LAS KYANG DE LTAR ‘BYUNG BA LEGS SHING, RTOGS RGYAN LAS GSUNGS PA DANG LUGS ‘DI LA MI ‘DRA BA MED DO,,

The fact that the Explanation gives this same definition is excellent; and there is absolutely no difference between our definition and that which is stated in The Jewel of Realizations.


[108]
DE LTAR CHOS GSUM PO BYANG SEMS KYI RGYUR ‘JOG PA NI, RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,

Setting forth these three items as being the cause of a bodhisattva reflects the system found in the String of Precious Jewels:


	[109]
,BDAG NYID DANG NI ‘JIG RTEN ‘DIS,
,BLA MED BYANG CHUB THOB ‘DOD NA,
,DE YI RTZA BA BYANG CHUB SEMS,
,RI DBANG RGYAL PO LTAR BRTAN DANG,
,PHYOGS MTHA’ GTUGS [f. 10b] PA’I SNYING RJE DANG,
,GNYIS LA MI BRTEN YE SHES LAGS,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I LUGS SO,,

If what you want
Is for you and all this world
To reach matchless Buddhahood,

Then you will need its roots:
A Wish for enlightenment
As firm as Mount Everest;

A compassion which reaches
Through infinite space;
And a form of wisdom
Which no longer rests on the two.


[110]
LUNG DES BYANG CHUB KYI RTZA BAR BSTAN GYI BYANG SEMS KYI RTZA BAR DNGOS SU MA BSTAN KYANG, RTZA BA NI DANG PO’I DON DANG, DE’I DUS KYI GTZO BO’I RGYU GSUM STON PA’I SKABS YIN PAS, BYANG SEMS KYI GTZO BO’I RGYU YIN PAR SKABS LAS SHES SO,,

Now it is true that this citation only indicates that these three are the root of enlightenment, and does not directly indicate that they are the root of a bodhisattva; nonetheless, the word “root” is meant to convey the idea of “original” cause—and this is the point in Arya Nagarjuna’s text where he is presenting the three principal causes during this initial period of the journey to enlightenment.  As such, we can deduce from the context that he considers them the primary causes of a bodhisattva.


[111]
CHOS GSUM BYANG SEMS KYI RGYUR STON PA ‘DI NYAN RANG SANGS RGYAS LAS DANG, SANGS RGYAS BYANG SEMS LAS ‘KHRUNGS NA, BYANG SEMS GANG LAS ‘KHRUNGS ZHES DPYOD PA’I SKABS YIN PAS, BYANG SEMS KYI RNAM ‘JOG GI RGYUR MI RUNG BAS SKYED BYED KYI RGYU’O,,

Now someone may come and raise the following objection:

This section, where these three items are described as the causes of a bodhisattva, is a juncture where we are examining the question of what it is that gives bodhisattvas their holy birth—since we have just covered how listeners & self-made buddhas take their holy birth from Buddhas, and Buddhas themselves take theirs from bodhisattvas.  As such, we must be talking about “causes” here in the sense of the causes which give birth to a bodhisattva, and not “causes” in the sense of the requirements for saying that someone is a bodhisattva.


[112]
DE LTAR ‘DI GSUM GANG GI RGYUR BZHAG PA’I BYANG SEMS DE’I MA MTHA’, LAM ZHUGS KYI BYANG SEMS THOG MA PA LA BYED DAM MI BYED, BYED NA THEG CHEN GYI SEMS BSKYED DE’I RGYUR ‘JOG PA MI ‘THAD DE, DE THOB MA THAG BYANG SEMS SU GZHAG DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This being the case, we ask you the following question: Is it or is it not true that the bodhisattva who is said to have these three as their causes is someone whom you consider to be, at the very least, a brand-new bodhisattva who has already entered one of the five paths?  If it is true, then it cannot be correct to say that the Wish, in the form it takes upon the greater way, is a cause of this bodhisattva—because it is only just after one attains this Wish that we can consider them a bodhisattva.


[113]
MTHA’ GNYIS LA MI BRTEN PA’I YE SHES BYANG SEMS KYI RGYUR ‘JOG PA YANG MI ‘THAD DE, BYANG SEMS RNAMS NI THOG MAR KUN RDZOB BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSKYED NAS, DE’I ‘OG TU BYANG SEMS KYI SPYOD PA PHYIN DRUG LA SLOB PA YIN PAS, DE LTA BU’I SHER PHYIN LA SLOB PA’I SKABS NYID NAS, MTHA’ GNYIS LA MI BRTEN PA’I YE SHES LA SLOB PA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is as well incorrect to say that the type of wisdom which no longer rests upon the two extremes is one of the causes of a bodhisattva.  This is because a bodhisattva first develops the deceptive form of the Wish for enlightenment, and only after that begins their training in the activities of a bodhisattva: the six perfections.  And it is only at the point where they train themselves in the perfection of wisdom found among these six that they are training themselves in the wisdom which no longer rests upon the two extremes.


[114]
MI BYED NA NI ZLA BA TSES PA LTA BU’I BYANG SEMS SU BSHAD PA DANG, SMAN GYI LJON SHING GI MYU GU LTA BU’I BYANG SEMS SU BSHAD PA DANG ‘GAL [f. 11a] BAR ‘GYUR RO ZHE NA,

And suppose instead that you reply, to our question above, that it is not true that the bodhisattva with these three as their causes is at least a brand-new bodhisattva who has already entered one of the five paths.  In this case you would be contradicting the description of this bodhisattva as one who is like a waxing moon, or as one who is like the first sprout of a medicinal tree.


[115]
JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I SKYON DU ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR PHYOGS GNYIS PA NI KHAS MI LEN PAS DANG PO KHAS LEN NO, ,’ON KYANG SNGAR BKOD PA’I SKYON NI MED DE, BYANG SEMS KYI SNGON DU ‘GRO BA’I SEMS BSKYED PA NI, SEMS BSKYED SGOM PA’I SKABS LA DGONGS KYI, BSGOMS PA LA BRTEN NAS SKYES PA’I SEMS BSKYED DNGOS MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We certainly don’t accept this second position, since doing so would in fact lead to the problems which you have pointed out.  Therefore, we accept the first position: that we must be referring at least to a brand-new bodhisattva who is already upon one of the five paths.  We don’t agree though that this position leads to the other problems, the ones that you brought up first here.  This is because—when we refer to the Wish for enlightenment which precedes the bodhisattva—we are speaking of the form that this Wish takes while we are working to develop it.  We are not in this case speaking of the actual Wish for enlightenment—the one which we develop as a result of having completed this work.


[116]
DE YANG DPER NA BUR SHING GI SHUN PA’I RO MYONG BA DANG, SHUN PA’I NANG GI RO MYONG BA DANG ‘DRA BAR SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON DU SANGS RGYAS THOB PAR BYA’O SNYAM PA TZAM NI, TSIG RJES ‘BRANGS PA’I GO BA TZAM YIN PAS BUR SHING GI SHUN PA’I RO DANG ‘DRA STE, DE LA SEMS BSKYED PA ZER YANG SEMS BSKYED DNGOS MIN NO,,

We can compare this distinction to the difference between tasting the skin of a piece of sugar cane and then actually tasting the inside.  Just thinking to yourself “I will reach enlightenment for the sake of every living being” is no more than an intellectual understanding of the Wish, and so it resembles the taste of the skin of a piece of sugar cane.  You can call it a “wish for enlightenment,” but it’s not the real thing.


[117]
BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SBYONG BA’I MAN NGAG BZHIN DU SBYANGS PA LA BRTEN NAS, YID LEGS PAR ‘KHUL THUB PA’I MYONG BA KHYAD PAR CAN SKYES PA NI, SHUN PA’I NANG GI BUR SHING DNGOS KYI RO DANG ‘DRA BAS, SEMS BSKYED MTSAN NYID PA YIN TE,

If on the other hand you follow the instructions on developing the Wish, and work at it, you can reach a point where you have a deep experience and are able to push the mind fluently into these thoughts.  This then is like tasting the inside of the sugar cane, and can thus be considered the Wish in its definitive form.


[118]
DON ‘DI LA DGONGS NAS LHAG BSAM BSKUL BA LAS KYANG,
,JI LTAR SHUN PA DE BZHIN SMRA BA STE,
,RO LTA BU NI ‘DI LA DON SEMS YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

It is with this point in mind that the sutra called Urging Us to Take Personal Responsibility says:

Talking is like skin of the cane;
The actual state of mind
Is like the taste within.


[119]
BYANG SEMS KYI RIGS CAN DBANG PO RNON POS SNGON DU DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA BTZAL NAS, DE NAS SEMS BSKYED PA YIN PAS SKYON GNYIS PA YANG MED PA NI ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Furthermore, practitioners of the bodhisattva type possessed of sharp faculties first seek out the worldview of suchness, and only afterwards give birth to the Wish.  The second problem you raise is thus also obviated, as we will elucidate further on in this work.


[120]
GNYIS SU MED PA’I BLO NI GZUNG ‘DZIN GNYIS SU SNANG BA MED PA MIN GYI, ‘GREL PAR MTHA’ GNYIS [f. 11b] DANG BRAL BA’I SHES RAB LA BSHAD LA, DE YANG BYANG SEMS KYI SNGON DU ‘ONG BA MI ‘GAL LO,,

Moreover, the “state of mind beyond duality” mentioned here is not one which is free of the appearance of an independent duality of object & subject; rather, it is explained in the Commentary as referring to a kind of wisdom which is free of the two extremes.  As such, it is no contradiction to say that it could come prior to the Wish for enlightenment.


[121]
DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED LA ‘CHAD PA NI SHIN TU MA ‘BREL TE, GNYIS SU MED BLO ZHES PAS THOG MAR ZHUGS PA’I BYANG SEMS KYI RGYU’I SHES RAB KYANG STON DGOS PAS SO,,

Interpreting this particular “state of mind beyond duality” as being the ultimate form of the Wish for enlightenment is irrelevant to the extreme, since the phrase as used here must apply as well to the wisdom which is the cause of a bodhisattva who has just stepped on to the five paths.



Why compassion is the root of the roots

[122]
GNYIS PA NI, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS DANG GNYIS SU MED PA’I YE SHES GNYIS KYI RTZA BA YANG SNYING RJE YIN PAS NA, DE GSUM GYI NANG NAS SNYING RJE GTZO BO NYID DU BSTAN PAR BZHED NAS, GANG PHYIR ZHES SOGS GSUNGS SO,,

This brings us to the second point from above: describing how it is that compassion is the very root of the other two causes of a bodhisattva as well.  The very root of both the Wish for enlightenment and the wisdom beyond duality is, in turn, compassion.  Master Chandrakirti—wishing to express how compassion is the very most important of the three—thus next composes the lines which include “For I believe...”


	[123]
	[I.2]
…Kṛpaiva bījaṃ jalavac ca vṛddhaye,
Ciropabhogasthitaye ca pākavad.
	
,GANG PHYIR BRTZE NYID RGYAL BA’I LO THOG
PHUN TSOGS ‘DI’I,
,SA BON DANG NI SPEL LA CHU ‘DRA YUN RING DU,
,LONGS SPYOD GNAS LA SMIN PA LTA BUR
‘DOD GYUR PA,
,DE PHYIR BDAG GIS THOG MAR SNYING RJE
BSTOD PAR BGYI,

And so here at the beginning,
I shall sing the praises of compassion—

For I believe that love, and only love,
Is like the seed which produces
Those excellent crops of the Victors;

And like the water which makes them grow,
And like the ripened fruit
Which then long afterwards
Is something we can enjoy.


[124]
GANG GI PHYIR SNYING BRTZE BA NI RGYAL BA’I LO TOG PHUN TSOGS ‘DI’I THOG MAR SKYED PA LA GAL CHE BA SA BON DANG NI ‘DRA LA, BAR DU GONG NAS GONG DU SPEL BA LA CHU DANG ‘DRA ZHING, THA MAR GDUL BYAS YUN RING DU LONGS SPYOD PA’I GNAS LA, ‘BRAS BU’I SMIN PA LTA BUR ‘DOD PAR GYUR PA DE’I PHYIR, ZLA BA’I ZHABS BDAG GIS NYAN RANG DANG SANGS RGYAS DANG, BYANG SEMS DANG DE’I RGYU GZHAN GNYIS LAS KYANG THOG MAR RAM, BSTAN BCOS RTZOM BA’I THOG MAR SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA BSTOD PAR BGYI’O,,

And so here at the beginning of the act of composing this classical commentary, I—that is, the great Chandrakirti—shall sing the praises of great compassion.  (One could also read “beginning” here as referring to compassion itself, which precedes even the other two causes of a bodhisattva, and thus both full Buddhas and the listeners & self-made buddhas.)  

This I do for I believe that love is crucial, like the seed which—at the outset—produces those excellent crops of the Victors.  And then in the interim love is like the water which makes these crops grow ever higher.  And then at the end, finally, it is like the ripened fruit, which long afterwards is something that we disciples can enjoy.  


[125]
DE YANG DA GZOD BSTOD PA MIN GYI DE MA THAG TU RGYAL BA’I LO TOG BSKRUN PA LA, THOG MTHA’ BAR GSUM DU GAL CHE BAR BSTAN PA DE NYID DE, ,NYID KYI SGRAS NI DPE’I SKABS SU PHYI’I LO TOG LA THOG MTHA’ BAR GSUM DU GAL CHE BA GSUM, SO SO BAR SONG BA LTA BU MIN PAR, DON GYI SKABS SU RGYAL BA’I LO TOG LA SNYING RJE KHO NA THOG MTHA’ BAR GSUM DU GAL CHE [f. 12a] BAR BSTAN NO,,

At this point Master Chandrakirti is not yet actually singing the praises; he is only pointing out that the crops of the Victors grow just after one has developed compassion—and that it is extremely important at all three stages: at the beginning, at the end, and in between.  The way he repeats the word “love”—“love, and only love”—is meant to indicate that the context of the metaphor does not exactly match that of the actual case it refers to.  That is, in the metaphor we have three different things that are crucial for three different stages—the beginning, the middle, and the end—in the growth of outer crops.  Here though it is only one thing—compassion—which is crucial at all three of these stages in the growth of the crops of the Victors.


[126]
THOG MAR GAL CHE BA LA SA BON LTA BU YIN TSUL NI, ‘DI LTAR SNYING RJE CHEN PO CAN NI SEMS CAN GYI SDUG BSNGAL GYIS SDUG BSNGAL BAS, SDUG BSNGAL CAN GYI SEMS CAN THAMS CAD BSKYAB PA’I PHYIR DU, BDAG GIS SEMS CAN ‘DI THAMS CAD ‘KHOR BA’I SDUG BSNGAL NAS BTON TE, SANGS RGYAS LA NGES PAR SBYAR BAR BYA’O SNYAM DU CHED DU BYA BA LA DMIGS PA’I SEMS BSKYED LA,

Let’s talk about the way in which compassion is crucial at the beginning—in the same way that a seed is.  A person who possesses great compassion as it is described here is tormented by the way that living beings are tormented; and they hope to shelter all of those who live in such torment.  They develop a Wish for enlightenment with a goal expressed in the following train of thought: “I will remove each & every one of these beings from the torment of the cycle of life, and with absolutely certainty deliver them to the state of enlightenment.”


[127]
DE YANG RANG GIS SANGS RGYAS THOB PA LA RAG LAS PAR MTHONG NAS, BDAG GIS ‘DI RNAMS KYI DON DU BLA MED BYANG CHUB CI NAS KYANG THOB PAR BYA’O SNYAM DU, BYANG CHUB LA DMIGS PA’I SEMS NGES PAR BSKYED DO,,

They recognize though that achieving this goal depends upon their achieving enlightenment themselves.  As such, they necessarily reach as well a Wish for enlightenment where they think, “No matter what, I will achieve matchless enlightenment, for the sake of all these suffering beings.”


[128]
DE ‘DRA BA’I DAM BCA’ BA DE YANG GNYIS SU MED PA’I YE SHES KYIS MTSON PA’I SBYIN SOGS KYI SPYOD PA DOR NA MI ‘GRUB PAR MTHONG NAS, YE SHES GTZO BOR GYUR PA’I SPYOD PA LA YANG NGES PA KHO NAR ‘JUG PAS NA, SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS KUN GYI SA BON NI SNYING RJE CHEN PO YIN NO,,

They recognize another thing too: that they will never be able to fulfill this commitment if they give up on the way of life represented here in the expression “wisdom beyond duality”—that is, giving & the rest.  As such they know that they have no choice but to engage in this way of life, where wisdom plays the principal role.  Thus it is that great compassion is the seed of all the qualities of an Enlightened Being.


[129]
DON ‘DI LA DGONGS NAS RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,THEG PA CHEN PO GANG ZHIG LAS,
,SNYING RJE SNGON BTANG SPYOD KUN DANG,
,YE SHES DRI MA MED BSHAD PA,
,SEMS YOD SU ZHIG DE LA SMOD,

The String of Precious Jewels is talking about the same idea when it says,

What person
With any brains at all
Would ever speak badly
Of the greater way—

Of the teachings which describe
That entire way of life
Ushered in by compassion,
And immaculate wisdom?


[130]
CES SNYING RJE SNGON DU BTANG BA’I SEMS BSKYED KYIS DRANGS PA’I SPYOD PA SPYI DANG, KHYAD PAR DU MTHA’ GNYIS KYI DMIGS GTAD KYI DRI MA MED PA’I YE SHES KYI SPYOD PA GSUM GYIS THEG CHEN GYI DON KUN BSDUS PAR GSUNGS [f. 12b] SO,,

The point here is that all the points of the greater way are covered in three concepts: in the general way of life inspired by the Wish for enlightenment, ushered in itself by compassion; and more particularly in the way of life of a wisdom which is free of the stain of allowing the mind to focus upon either of the two extremes.


[131]
BAR DU GAL CHE BA LA CHU DANG ‘DRA TSUL NI, SNYING RJE’I SA BON GYIS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS KYI MYU GU THOG MAR BSKYED DU ZIN KYANG, DUS PHYIS SNYING RJE’I CHUS YANG DANG YANG DU MA BCUS NA, ‘BRAS BU SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYUR GYUR PA’I TSOGS GNYIS YANGS PA MA BSAGS PA ‘DI, NGES PAR NYAN RANG GANG RUNG GI MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA MNGON DU BYED LA, SNYING RJE’I CHUS YANG YANG BCUS NA DE LTAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

Let’s discuss next how it is that compassion is crucial during the middle period, in the same way that water is.  It may well be the case that the seed of compassion has already, during the initial period, produced the fresh sprout of the Wish for enlightenment.  If though during the time which follows we fail to apply the water of compassion to this sprout over & over, then we fail to accumulate any massive form of the two collections which serve as the cause of an Enlightened Being.  This situation will then lead us, with certainty, to actualize only nirvana—either that of a listener, or of a self-made buddha.  This is not the case when we do apply the water of compassion continuously.


[132]
THA MAR GAL CHE BA LA SMIN PA DANG ‘DRA TSUL NI, ,RGYAL BA’I GO ‘PHANG THOB TU ZIN KYANG SNYING RJE’I SMIN PA DANG BRAL NA, ‘KHOR BA JI SRID KYI BAR DU SEMS CAN RNAMS KYIS NYE BAR LONGS SPYOD PA’I RGYUR MI ‘GYUR ZHING, NYAN RANG DANG BYANG SEMS ‘PHAGS PA’I TSOGS GCIG NAS GCIG TU BRGYUD PA BAR MA CHAD PA ‘PHEL BAR YANG MI ‘GYUR LA, ‘BRAS BU’I SAR SNYING RJE CHEN PO RGYUN LDAN DU ‘JUG NA DE LAS BZLOG STE ‘BYUNG BA’O,,

Let’s look finally at how it is that compassion is crucial at the end, like the ripened fruit.  One may have already attained the state of a victorious Buddha; but if they were to lack the ripened fruit of compassion, then there would be nothing there for living beings to enjoy for all the time up to the last day of the cycle of pain.  In this case, the continued accumulation of the causes for enlightenment by listeners & self-made buddhas, and realized bodhisattvas, could never proceed one to the other, growing in an uninterrupted stream.  If though at the level of the final result one goes on with a continuous stream of great compassion in their heart, then the opposite occurs.


[133]
DE LTAR NA GANG PHYIR ZHES PA BZHI’I DON BKRAL BAS NI, THEG CHEN PA BYED PAR ‘DOD NA THOG MAR YID SNYING RJE CHEN PO’I GZHAN DBANG DU GYUR PA ZHIG DANG, DE NAS DE LA BRTEN NAS BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS MTSAN NYID TSANG BA CIG SNYING THAG PA NAS BSKYED PA DANG,

Given all this, a proper explanation of the four lines which include “for I believe” should inspire in us a certain understanding.  We should be thinking to ourselves how—if we have any hopes of becoming a follower of the greater way—then at the outset we must lose our heart to the emotion of great compassion.  And we should be thinking how, after that, we must build on this emotion to grow, from the very depths of our heart, a Wish for enlightenment which is complete in every necessary respect.  


[134]
SEMS BSKYED PAS NI GDON MI ZA BAR BYANG SEMS KYI SPYOD PA SPYI DANG, KHYAD PAR DU ZAB MO’I LTA BA PHU THAG GCOD DGOS PAR ‘DUG SNYAM NAS DE DAG LA SLOB PA CIG DGOS PAR BSTAN PA LA NGES PA BRTAN PO RNYED DGOS [f. 13a] SO,,

And then finally we should be thinking how—once we have developed the Wish—we will without the slightest doubt need to follow the way of life of a bodhisattva in general; and more especially a truly pure form of the view of the profound.  In short, we must come to an unshakable belief in the teaching which says that we absolutely have to train ourselves in each of these points.



Compassion which focuses on living beings

[135]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA DANG, CHOS DANG DMIGS PA MED PA LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA’O,,

This brings us to the second section of the offering of praise, where we bow down to great compassion as we make the division into its components.  Here the author bows down first to that form of compassion which focuses upon living beings; and after that to the form of compassion which focuses upon things, and upon the way in which beings are not even there.


	[136]
	[I.3]
Purāhamityātmani sanniviṣṭe
mamedamityāhita bhava saṅge,
Bhramaddhaṭīyantra ivāsvatantre
jagatyabhūdyā karuṇā name tām.

,DANG POR NGA ZHES BDAG LA ZHEN GYUR ZHING,
,BDAG GI ‘DI ZHES DNGOS LA CHAGS BSKYED PA,
,ZO CHUN ‘PHYAN LTAR RANG DBANG MED PA YI,
,’GRO LA SNYING RJER GYUR GANG DE LA ‘DUD,

First they want a person,
Talking about “me”;
And then they crave for things,
Talking about “mine.”

I bow down to that thing
Which is compassion for all beings—
Those who revolve here helplessly,
Like buckets on a water wheel.


[137]
DANG PO NI, NGAR ‘DZIN GYI ‘JIG LTAS NGA YIR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTA SKYED PAS, SEMS CAN ‘DI RNAMS NI DANG POR TE BDAG GI BAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA’I ‘JIG LTA’I SNGA ROL TU, NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTAS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN PA’I BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD DO SNYAM NAS, NGA ZHES PA’I DON ‘DI NYID DU STE LA BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PAR BYED DO,,

We begin with the first.  The version of the view of destruction where we hold to a “me” triggers the version where we hold to some “mine.”  Thus all suffering beings first (that is, before they give rise to the view of destruction where they begin wanting what is “mine”) give rise to the view of destruction where they want a “me,” talking about something which is a thing that is itself—which exists “in reality.”  This is a view of “me” which thinks to itself that a person who could never exist in & of themselves does exist in & of themselves.


[138]
DE’I ‘OG TU NGA YIR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTAS, NGAR ‘DZIN GYI DMIGS YUL LAS GZHAN PA STE DE MIN PA’I GZUGS DANG MIG LA SOGS PA’I DNGOS PO LA, ‘DI NI BDAG GI’O ZHES BDAG GI BA LA BDEN PAR CHAGS PA BSKYED PAS,

And then subsequent to this, these beings give rise to the view of destruction which holds to some “mine.”  This view focuses upon an object which is different—which is other than—the object which is focused upon by the one which holds to a “me.”  This object consists of things such as visible forms, or the eye itself.  The view which holds it talks about “this” being “mine,” in a way where one craves the idea that what is mine exists “in reality.”


[139]
ZO CHUN GYI ‘PHRUL ‘KHOR ‘PHYAN PA STE ‘KHOR BA LTAR, RANG DBANG MED PAR ‘KHOR BA YI ‘GRO BA LA SNYING RJER GYUR PA GANG YIN PA DE LA ‘DUD DO ZHES PA NI, SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA’I DON NO,,

Because of all this, all beings revolve here, circle here, like buckets on a water wheel—turning helplessly.  And Master Chandrakirti is saying that he “bows down to that thing which is compassion for these beings.”  The point is that he is bowing down to that form of compassion which focuses upon living beings.


[140]
‘GRO BA RNAMS ZO CHUN GYI RGYUD MO DANG ‘DRA LUGS JI LTAR YIN SNYAM NA, DE LA SEMS CAN DANG ZO CHUN GYI RGYUD GNYIS NI ‘DRA BA PO DANG ‘DRA YUL TE KHYAD PAR GYI GZHI’O,,

“Now just how is it,” one may ask, “that the lives of beings resemble the mechanism of a water wheel?”  The point is that the ways in which both water wheels and the lives of suffering beings flow are similar—one being the thing which resembles the other, and one being the thing which the other resembles: the thing which possesses a certain quality.


[141]
‘DRA TSUL NI DPE LA THAG PAS BSDAMS PA LA SOGS PA’I KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS DRUG YOD PA BZHIN DU, DON LA’ANG DE YOD PAR PHYOGS GCIG TU BSTAN NA,

How are their lives, and the wheel, similar?  The example in the metaphor here possesses six different qualities—such as that of being bound with ropes.  The subject of the metaphor also possesses the same qualities.  Let’s isolate these six for you here.


[142]
KHYAD PAR DANG PO NI BCUD KYI ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI NI [f. 13b] LAS DANG NYON MONGS PA’I THAG PAS CHES DAM DU BSDAMS PA’O, ,’DI NI ZHES PA NI ‘OG MA LNGA LA YANG SBYAR RO,,

(1) The first quality is that this world—in the sense of the beings who inhabit it—is tied up incredibly tightly in the ropes of karma & negative emotions.  (For the remaining five, the same wording—“this world”—should be applied.)


[143]
GNYIS PA NI, ZO CHUN GYI ‘PHRUL ‘KHOR BSKOR MKHAN DANG ‘DRA BAR, RNAM PAR SHES PAS BSKYED PA LA RAG LAS PAR ‘JUG PA’O,,

(2) These beings depend upon being animated by consciousness for their operation, in the same way that the machinery of the water wheel depends upon something or someone to set it turning.


[144]
GSUM PA NI, ‘KHOR BA’I KHRON PA CHEN PO SRID RTZE NAS, MNAR MED PA LA THUG PA ZAB PAR BAR SKABS MED PAR ‘PHYAN PA’O,,

(3) Thirdly, these beings revolve in a well of immense proportions, turning without pause inside an area bounded above by the high level known as the “Peak of Existence,” and extending below to the depths of the hell known as “Torment Without Respite.”


[145]
BZHI PA NI, THUR DU NGAN ‘GROR ‘BAD RTZOL LA MI LTOS PAR RANG GI NGANG GIS ‘GRO ZHING GYEN DU BDE ‘GROR NI ‘BAD PA CHEN POS DRANG BAR BYA BA’O,,

(4) Fourth, they slide downwards, into the three lower realms, almost automatically—without any special effort of their own.  But it is only with great effort that they are drawn upwards, to the three higher realms.


[146]
LNGA PA NI, MA RIG PA DANG SRED LEN GYI NYON MONGS PA DANG, ‘DU BYED DANG SRID PA’I LAS DANG, LHAG MA BDUN GYI SKYE BA’I KUN NAS NYON MONGS PA GSUM YOD KYANG, DE GSUM GYI SNGA PHYI’I RIM PA MTHA’ GCIG TU NGES PAR MI NUS PA’O,,

(5) Fifth, their journey involves three different forces: negative emotions as a motivating factor, in the form of ignorance, along with initial desire and strong desire; karma in the form of fresh karmic seeds and then ripe karmic seeds; and the parts of a resulting rebirth which are imbued with negativity—that is, the remaining seven links.  And yet it is impossible to say with any certainty which of the three has come before or after any of the others.


[147]
DRUG PA NI, NYI MA RE RE ZHING SDUG BSNGAL GYI SDUG BSNGAL DANG, ‘GYUR BA’I SDUG BSNGAL DANG, KHYAB PA ‘DU BYED KYI SDUG BSNGAL GYIS GCOG PA’I PHYIR, ‘GRO BA ‘DI NI ZO CHUN GYI RGYUD MO’I GNAS SKABS LAS MA ‘DAS PA ZHIG GO

(6) Sixth, these beings are battered like the wheel’s buckets, for every single day of their life they are assailed by outright pain; by pain in the form of change; and by the pain which pervades every creature’s life.  As such, we can say that there is nothing about these beings’ lives which ever escapes the metaphor of gears turning a water wheel.


[148]
,’DIR KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS DRUG GI SGO NAS CHOS MTHUN SBYAR BA NI, SEMS CAN ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHYAMS TSUL GYI GO BA TZAM ZHIG SKYED PA’I PHYIR MIN NO,,

Saying that the two situations are parallel in six different particulars is not simply something that we do to give our reader an understanding of the way in which living beings wander here & there in the cycle of existence.


[149]
‘O NA JI LTAR YIN SNYAM NA, SNGAR THEG CHEN LA ‘JUG ‘DOD PAS THOG MAR SNYING RJE CHEN PO SKYED DGOS PAR BSTAN KYANG, CI ‘DRA BA ZHIG BSGOMS PAS SNYING RJE SKYED TSUL SNGAR MA BSTAN PAS, ‘DIR SEMS CAN RNAMS RANG DBANG MED BAR ‘KHOR [f. 14a] BAR ‘KHYAMS TSUL BSTAN PA LTAR BSGOMS PAS, SNYING RJE CHEN PO SKYED TSUL STON PA YIN NO,,

And why not?  We have already described how those who wish to enter the greater way must, at the outset, develop great compassion.  But we haven’t, at least to this point, explained what it is that a person should meditate upon in order to develop this compassion.  As such, we are now showing how a person can develop great compassion, by meditating upon the way in which living beings wander, helplessly, here in the wheel of life.


[150]
DE YANG BYED PA PO GANG GIS ‘KHOR DU BCUG NA, SHIN TU MA ZHI ZHING MA DUL BA’I SEMS ‘DI NYID KYIS SO,,

What is the agent which forces us to turn in this circle?  It is our own mind, completely incapable of peace, and completely out of control.


[151]
GNAS GANG DU TSUL JI LTAR ‘KHOR NA, SRID RTZE NAS MNAR MED KYI BAR GYI GNAS ‘DIR, MI ‘KHOR BA’I SKABS CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PAR RO,,

Where is it that we circle, and how is it that we circle?  We circle without the slightest pause, here in the land that stretches from the Peak of Existence down to Torment Without Respite.


[152]
RGYU RKYEN GANG GIS ‘KHOR NA LAS DANG NYON MONGS PA’I DBANG GIS SO,,

What causes & factors drive us to circle?  We are forced to do so by our karma and our negative emotions.


[153]
DE YANG BSOD NAMS MA YIN PA’I LAS DANG, DE’I NYON MONGS KYI DBANG GIS NGAN ‘GRO DANG, BSOD NAMS DANG MI G-YO BA’I LAS DANG, DE’I NYON MONGS KYI DBANG GIS BDE ‘GROR ‘KHOR LA,

Now negative karma, and the negative emotions associated with it, drive us to the lower realms.  Positive karma, and the kind of karma we call “unshifting”—along with the negative emotions associated with them—drive us to the higher realms.


[154]
DE’I DANG PO NI DER SKYE BA’I DON DU ‘BAD MI DGOS PAR NGANG GIS ‘JUG PA DANG, PHYI MA NI DE’I RGYU RNAMS ‘BAD PA CHEN POS SGRUB DGOS PAS DKA’ BA STE,

And we tend to slide automatically into the first of these two, taking birth there without expending any special effort.  The causes to bring about the second, though, are difficult to assemble—for they can be achieved only through intense work.


[155]
LUNG GZHI LAS, BDE ‘GRO DANG NGAN ‘GRO NAS ‘PHOS TE NGAN ‘GROR ‘GRO BA NI SA CHEN PO’I RDUL DANG, DE GNYIS NAS ‘PHOS TE BDE ‘GROR ‘GRO BA NI, PHYAG SEN GYI RTZE MOS BZHES PA’I RDUL DANG ‘DRA BAR GSUNGS PA LTAR RO,,

Remember, for example, the passage in The Foundation of the Word, where Lord Buddha states that those who die in either the higher realms or the lower realms, and then pass on to the lower realms, are as numerous as the particles of dust contained in the entire surface of the Earth; whereas those who die in these realms and pass on to the higher realms are only, by comparison, as few as the particles of dust that remained upon the tip of his fingernail after he had touched it lightly to the ground.


[156]
RTEN ‘BREL TSAR GCIG GI NYON MONGS GSUM GANG RUNG ZHIG GI DUS SU YANG TSAR GZHAN GYI KUN NAS NYON MONGS GZHAN GNYIS ‘JUG PAS RGYUN MI ‘CHAD PA DANG, NYIN RE ZHING SDUG BSNGAL GSUM CHU’I GNYER MA LTA BUS LAN CIG MA YIN PAR MNAR BA RNAMS SEMS PA’O,,

At the point where any one of the three negative emotions connected to one round of the links of dependent events is active, then at the same time the other two groups of links related to negative emotions and belonging to a different round of the twelve are also active; thus it is that the wheel turns without a pause.  And each & every day, all three forms of pain radiate out and pass through every living being, like ripples on the surface of a lake, torturing them continuously.  We have to learn to think about these things.


[157]
‘DI YANG SNGON DU RANG NYID ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHYAMS TSUL BSAMS PA NA, YID LA ‘GYUR BA CI YANG [f. 14b] MI THON PA CIG GIS, SEMS CAN GZHAN GYI STENG DU BSAMS PA NA, DE RNAMS KYI SDUG BSNGAL MI BZOD PA LAS DANG PO PA LA ‘ONG MED PAS,

Consider rather the kind of person who has yet to give any serious thought about how they themselves are wandering through this cycle of pain—and so has yet to experience any kind of mental transformation.  This kind of raw beginner then can hardly reach a state of mind where they can no longer bear the pain of these others because they have turned their attention to the situation that others face.


[158]
BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PAR GSUNGS PA LTAR SNGON DU RANG STENG DU BSAM MO, ,DE NAS SEMS CAN GZHAN LA BSGOM PAR BYA’O,,

Thus we should do as the commentary to The 400 Verses advises us to: first, contemplate our own situation, and then meditate upon the situation that others find themselves in.


[159]
‘O NA SEMS CAN GZHAN LA ‘KHOR BAR SDUG KUN GYIS MNAR TSUL BSGOMS PA NYID KYIS SNYING RJE CHEN PO ‘DREN NAM, GROGS GZHAN CIG DGOS SNYAM NA,

In this regard, the following question may occur to our reader: “Can we inspire within ourselves great compassion simply by meditating upon how others are tortured by these two aspects of life here in the cycle—the fact of pain, and the fact of the source from which it arises?  Or do we need to engage in some other contemplation together with this one?”


[160]
‘DI NA DGRA LA SDUG BSNGAL MTHONG BA NA MI BZOD PA MED KYI STENG DU DGA’ BA DANG, PHAN GNOD GANG YANG MA BYAS PA SDUG BSNGAL BAR MTHONG BA NA, PHAL CHER YAL BAR ‘DOR BA NI RANG GI YID DU ‘ONG BA MED PAS LAN LA,

Here in the everyday world, when we see someone that we don’t like going through some kind of pain, it’s not as if we feel that we can no longer bear it; on the contrary, we tend to derive some satisfaction from their problems.  And when we see suffering come to a neutral person—to someone who has neither helped nor harmed us—then we typically simply ignore them.  Both of these attitudes derive from the fact that we have no feelings that these people are beloved by us.


[161]
GNYEN GYI SDUG BSNGAL MTHONG NA MI BZOD PA DANG, DE YANG YID DU ‘ONG TSABS JI LTAR CHE BA TZAM GYIS DE’I SDUG BSNGAL MI BZOD PA SHUGS DRAG PAR SNANG BAS, SEMS CAN SHIN TU GCES SHING YID LA PHANGS PA’I YID ‘ONG SKYED PA ZHIG DGOS PA NI GNAD CHEN PO’O,,

When however we see our friends or family undergoing some kind of trouble, then we feel that it is something unbearable to us; and the degree to which we feel this way follows from how strongly these people are beloved by us.  Thus it is a crucial point that we must develop, within ourselves, feelings where we cherish other beings deeply—where we feel a healthy attachment for them, and see them as our beloved.


[162]
YID ‘ONG THABS GANG GIS SKYED PA LA MKHAS PA’I DBANG PO DAG GI LUGS GNYIS SNANG BA’I DANG PO NI, ZLA BA’I ZHABS KYIS BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PAR SEMS CAN RNAMS THOG MA MED PA NAS, PHA MA SOGS KYI GNYEN YIN PA BSAMS NA, DE RNAMS BSGRAL BA’I PHYIR DU ‘KHOR BAR MCHONG PAR BZOD PA YIN PAR GSUNGS PA LTAR,

How do we reach this point, where everyone strikes us as beloved?  We see two methods for this described by the Lords of Sages.  With the first, we refer to the commentary on The 400 Verses composed by the great Chandrakirti.  Here we are instructed to contemplate how—over the length of time with no beginning—each & every living being has been our own father, or mother, or other family or friend.  And then we would be willing to throw ourselves into the cycle, in order to free them.


[163]
BDAG NYID CHEN PO TZANDRA GO MI DANG, MKHAS PA’I DBANG PO KA MA LA SH’I LAS KYANG GSUNGS SO,,

This particular method has also been described by the great being Chandragomi, and by that Lord among Sages, Kamalashila.


[164]
PHYOGS GNYIS PA NI DPAL LDAN ZHI BA LHA’I LUGS TE [f. 15a], DE NI GZHAN DU BSHAD ZIN PA LAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

The second approach is that of the glorious Shantideva; I have already elucidated this method in other works, which our reader may make reference to.


[165]
DE LTAR SEMS CAN YID LA SHIN TU GCES PA DANG, ‘KHOR BA NA MNAR BA’I TSUL GNYIS KYI SGO NAS, SNYING RJE CHEN PO SBYONG BA LA ‘BAD PA DE DAG GIS NI, ZLA BAS MCHOD BRJOD THUN MONG MA YIN PA MDZAD PA DON YOD PAR BYAS LA,

Those who make a true effort at this point to develop the attitude of great compassion—through this dual methodology of learning to cherish living beings deeply, and contemplating how the cycle of life torments them—are giving meaning to the unique offering of praise which Master Chandrakirti has composed here.


[166]
DE LTAR MA YIN NA DE’I MKHAS PAR RLOM PA NI, NE TZO’I ‘DON PA DANG ‘DRA STE, SKABS GZHAN DU YANG DE BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Thinking though that we are some kind of master of this text without this kind of personal implementation of it is like living the life of a parrot that simply repeats whatever they hear.  Remember this, as we go through every other section of this work as well.


[167]
SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJER ‘GRO TSUL NI ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

How it is that we describe this as the kind of compassion which focuses on living beings is something we’ll be covering further on in this work.



Compassion which focuses upon things,
	and upon the way in which
beings are not even there

[168]
GNYIS PA NI, CHOS LA DMIGS PA DANG DMIGS PA MED PA LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE YANG, DMIGS PA’I SGO NAS GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR ‘GRO BA ZHES PA GNYIS SMOS SO,,

Here is the second part from before—where the author bows down to the form of compassion which focuses upon things, and upon the way in which beings are not even there.  The two sections of the original text which include the words “every living being” are meant to isolate two aspects of compassion, according to their object of focus: the type which is focused upon things, and the way in which beings are not even there.


	[169]
[I.4]
Antaś calad vāriṇi candravac calaṃ
svabhāva śūnyaṃ ca jagad vipaśyataḥ, 	
Kṛpā svatantraṃ jagatāṃ vimuktaye
Samantabhadra praṇidhi praṇāmitam.

[I.5]
Yadasya ceto muditā pratiṣṭhitaṃ
jinātmajasya prathamaṃ tad ucyate,     	
Ataḥ prabhṛtyeva hi tasya lābhataḥ
sa bodhisattva dhvaninaiva kathyate.


	[I.4-5a]
,’GRO BA G-YO BA’I CHU YI NANG GI ZLA BA LTAR,
,G-YO DANG RANG BZHIN NYID KYIS STONG PAR
MTHONG BA YI,
,RGYAL BA’I SRAS PO ‘DI YI SEMS GANG ‘GRO BA RNAMS,
,RNAM PAR GROL BAR BYA PHYIR SNYING RJE’I
DBANG GYUR ZHING,
,KUN TU BZANG PO’I SMON PAS RAB BSNGOS DGA’ BA LA,
,RAB TU GNAS PA DE NI DANG PO ZHES BYA’O,

The one we call the “first” is the one
Where a child of the Victors sees every living creature
As constantly shifting, and empty
Of any nature of their own—
Like the moon reflected in shifting waters;

And where their heart becomes a slave
To thoughts of compassion,
Determined to free these beings;

Living in a place of joy,
Dedicating all they do
With the prayer of Perfect Goodness.


[170]
‘GRO BA RLUNG GIS G-YO BA’I CHU YI NANG GI ZLA BA LTAR G-YO BA STE SKAD CIG GIS ‘JIG PAR MTHONG NAS, DE LA SNYING RJER GYUR PA GANG YIN PA DE LA ‘DUD DO, ,ZHES PA DANG SBYAR BA NI CHOS LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA’O,

At this point, Master Chandrakirti is bowing down to the form of compassion which is focused upon things; to relate this to the root text, what he is saying is: “I bow down to that thing which is the compassion where we first see that every living creature is constantly shifting, like the moon reflected in shifting waters (which is to say, coming and going by the instant), and then experience the feelings of compassion.”


[171]
DE BZHIN DU ‘GRO BA CHU’I NANG GI ZLA GZUGS LTAR, RANG BZHIN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR SNANG YANG DES STONG PAR MTHONG NAS, DE LA SNYING RJER GYUR PA LA ‘DUD DO ZHES PA DANG SBYAR BA NI, ,DMIGS PA MED PA’I SNYING RJE LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA’O,,

He is also bowing down to the form of compassion which is focused upon the way in which beings are not even there; to relate this one to the root text, Master Chandrakirti is saying, “I bow down to that thing which is compassion where we first see that every living creature is like an image of the moon reflected in some water (that is, they may seem to exist through some nature of their own, but in fact they are empty of any such nature); and then experience the feelings of compassion.”


[172]
‘GREL PAR ‘GRO BA ZHES PA BZHAG NAS SNYING RJER GYUR GANG DE LA ‘DUD CES GSUNGS PA NI, DMIGS PA ‘OG MA GNYIS LA ‘GRO BA ZHES PA YOD PA LA DGONGS SO,,

At this point in the autocommentary, the wording mentions “bowing down to that thing which is compassion,” but passes over “every living creature.”  The idea is that the phrase “every living creature” is assumed in the two subsequent objects of focus.


[173]
‘DI LTAR CHU SHIN TU DVANGS PA [f. 15b] RLUNG SHIN TU DRAG PO MIN PAS, CHU’I CHA SHAS BRLABS PAS KHYAB PA’I NANG DU ZLA BA’I GZUGS BRNYAN, 

The picture here is of a crystal-clear body of water covered by ripples created by currents of a wind which is not particularly strong; and in a certain part of the water’s surface we see a reflection of the moon.


[174]
GZUGS BRNYAN LAS SNGAR DMIGS PA’I RTEN GYI YUL CHU DANG LHAN CIG TU, NYE RE RE ‘JIG PA ZLA BA RANG GI DNGOS PO MNGON SUM DU DMIGS PA LTA BUR SHAR BA NA,

But rather than appearing to be a reflection, the moon—fluttering in and out of existence as it floats upon the surface of the water, the basis that we focus upon first—seems to be the real thing, standing right there in front of our eyes.


[175]
DAM PA STE SKYE BO TSUL DE LA MKHAS PA DAG GIS SKAD CIG RE RE LA MI RTAG PA DANG, GANG DU SNANG BA’I ZLA BA’I RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG PAR MTHONG NGO,,

“Holy ones” though—meaning people who are well versed in how all this works—see that the moon in the water is impermanent, lasting only instant by instant; and that it is empty of having any nature of being the moon which it appears to be.

	
[176]
DPE DE BZHIN DU BYANG SEMS SNYING RJE’I DBANG DU GYUR PA RNAMS KYIS KYANG, SEMS CAN ‘JIG LTA’I MTSOR DE RGYAS PA’I PHYIR DU ‘BAB PA’I MA RIG PA’I CHU SNGON PO RGYA CHE BA DANG LDAN PA, TSUL MIN YID BYED KYI RNAM RTOG GI RLUNG GIS BSKYOD PA’I NANG NA GNAS PA, NAM KHA’I ZLA BA LTA BU’I RANG GI LAS DKAR NAG GI GZUGS BRNYAN LTA BUR MDUN NA GNAS PA RNAMS,

The metaphor holds with those bodhisattvas who are slaves to thoughts of compassion.  They are focusing on living beings who possess vast rivers of ignorance, feeding into an ocean of the view of destruction, swelling it.  These beings exist within waters which are stirred by the winds of their wrong ideas—of how they think of things in the wrong way.  And there in front of them lies the reflection of how they have treated others—right or wrong—like that of the moon in the sky.


[177]
SKAD CIG RE RE LA ‘JIG PA’I ‘DU BYED KYI SDUG BSNGAL THOG TU ‘BAB PA DANG, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PAR MTHONG BA NA, DE RNAMS LA DMIGS NAS SNYING RJE CHEN PO SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE,

In every passing moment of their lives, they are stricken by a special kind of suffering: the fact that certain forces have given them their birth—and so they must in turn be destroyed.  And they are devoid of possessing any nature which is their own.  The bodhisattvas see these beings thus, and in their hearts rises that great compassion which focuses upon them.


[178]
DE YANG SEMS CAN YID DU ‘ONG BA DANG, ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHYAMS PA’I TSUL BSAMS PA LAS SKYE STE SNGAR BSHAD PA BZHIN NO,,

This compassion is as well born, as we have already mentioned, from seeing all these beings as beloved, and from thinking about how they are wandering through the cycle of pain.


[179]
‘JIG LTA MA RIG PA YIN KYANG DE LAS MA RIG PA LOGS SU BSHAD PA NI, ‘JIG LTA ‘DREN BYED CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN GYI MA RIG PA LA DGONGS SO,,

What we call the “view of destruction” is a kind of misunderstanding, but misunderstanding is traditionally also treated separately.  The idea behind doing this is that what brings on the view of destruction is misunderstanding in the form of grasping to the idea that things could be themselves.


[180]
‘DIR ‘GREL PAR SNYING RJE GSUM RNAM PAS MI ‘BYED PAR DMIGS YUL GYIS ‘BYED PAR GSUNGS PAS,

In the Autocommentary we see the statement that compassion is divided up according to the object towards which it focuses, rather than being classified by how we are thinking as we feel it.


[181]
GSUM GA’I [f. 16a] RNAM PA NI SEMS CAN SDUG BSNGAL DANG ‘BRAL BAR ‘DOD PA’I RNAM PA CAN YIN PAS, SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA YIN PA YANG ‘DRA STE, SNYING RJE DANG PO’I SKABS SU ‘GRO LA SNYING RJER GYUR ZHES GSUNGS LA, PHYI MA GNYIS KYI SKABS SU YANG ‘GRO BA G-YO BA ZHES GSUNGS PAS, SEMS CAN DMIGS PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The way we think as we feel this compassion, then, is the same in all three cases: we want living beings to be free of pain.  As such, all three are also the same in that they are focused upon these beings.  This is true in the way in which Entering the Middle Way indicates that living beings are the objects of focus here: in the case of the first form of compassion, the text says “compassion for all beings”—and in the case of the latter two forms it speaks of “every living creature, constantly shifting.”


[182]
DES NA CHOS LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJES NI, SEMS CAN TZAM ZHIG LA DMIGS PA MIN GYI, SKAD CIG GIS ‘JIG PA’I SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA YIN PAS, SKAD CIG GI MI RTAG PAS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I SEMS CAN DMIGS PA’O,,

Thus we can say that the form of compassion which focuses upon things is not just focused upon living beings, but rather upon living beings who are being destroyed moment by moment.  That is, it is focused upon living beings as distinguished by the quality of instantaneous impermanence.


[183]
SEMS CAN SKAD CIG GIS ‘JIG PAR NGES PA NA, RTAG GCIG RANG DBANG CAN GYI SEMS CAN YOD PA BLO NGO DER KHEGS PAS, PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I SEMS CAN MED PA NGES PAR NUS SO,,

Once a person comes to a realization of the fact that living beings are being destroyed moment by moment, the idea that a living being could be unchanging, singular, and independent cannot be kept inside their mind.  And then they are capable of realizing there is no living being who exists separate from the parts that make them up.


[184]
DE’I TSE SEMS CAN NI PHUNG PO’I TSOGS TZAM LA BTAGS PAR KHONG DU CHUD PAS, PHUNG SOGS KYI CHOS TZAM LA BTAGS PA’I SEMS CAN DMIGS PAR ‘GRO BAS CHOS LA DMIGS PA ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

At this point, they grasp the fact that living beings are projections overlaid upon nothing more than a combination of their parts.  And so when they focus on a living being it turns into focusing on a living being which they see as the result of a projection upon nothing more than certain objects or things, such as the parts of a person.   As such, they are said to be “focusing on things.”


[185]
MI RTAG PA’I SEMS CAN ZHES PA NI MTSON PA TZAM STE, RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS SU MED PA’I SEMS CAN DMIGS PAR BYED PA LTA BU LA YANG, CHOS LA DMIGS PA ZHES BYA’O,,

When we mention a living being here who is “changing,” it’s just one of the examples we could have chosen.  When we take, for instance, a living being who has no substantial existence—in the sense of not being self-standing—as our object of focus, this can also be termed “focusing on things.”


[186]
DES NA CHOS TZAM LA BTAGS PA’I SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA LA CHOS LA DMIGS PA ZHES PA NI, BAR GYI TSIG MI MNGON PAR BYED PA’O,,

Therefore the expression “focusing on things” is actually a shortened version of the full expression, “focusing on a living being who is the result of a projection upon nothing more than certain objects, or things.”


[187]
DMIGS PA MED [f. 16b] PA LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJES KYANG SEMS CAN TZAM LA DMIGS PA MIN GYI, DMIGS PA KHYAD PAR BA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA’I SEMS CAN LA DMIGS SO,,

The form of compassion which we say is “focused upon something which is not even there” is another case where we are focused upon something more than a simple living being.  That is, there is a certain distinction in how we focus: we are focusing on a living being that we see as being devoid of existing through any nature of their own.


[188]
DMIGS PA MED PA NI MTSAN ‘DZIN GYIS BZUNG BA LTAR GYI ZHEN YUL MED PA BDEN MED DO,,

The expression “something which is not even there” is a reference to the fact that something is not real—in the sense that the thing which we believe is there when we feel that the indicators of a thing are the thing itself could never be there.  


[189]
BDEN MED KYIS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA LA, DMIGS PA MED PA LA DMIGS PA ZHES SAM, DMIGS PA MED PA’I SNYING RJE ZHES BAR GYI TSIG MI MNGON PAR BYAS PA’O,,

Again this is a shortened way of referring to a particular form of compassion: in this case, we give the name “compassion for something which is not even there” or “compassion which is focused upon something which is not even there” to a compassion which is focused upon a living being while at the same time drawing the distinction that they are something which is unreal.


[190]
BOD KYI t’IK BYED MANG POS SNYING RJE GNYIS PA NYID KYIS SKAD CIG GIS ‘JIG PAR DMIGS PA DANG, SNYING RJE GSUM PA NYID KYIS RANG BZHIN MED PAR DMIGS ZER BA NI, ‘DI DAG GI DMIGS RNAM LEGS PAR MA RTOGS PA’I BSHAD PA STE,

Many Tibetan commentators have made the claim that the second form of compassion alone is focused upon how something is being destroyed moment by moment; and that the third form alone is focused upon how something has no nature of its own.  This explanation though reflects a failure to understand clearly what the objects upon which these forms of compassion reflect actually are—and here’s why.


[191]
SNYING RJE GNYIS NI SEMS CAN SDUG BSNGAL DANG ‘BRAL ‘DOD KYI RNAM PA CAN DU KHAS LEN DGOS LA, SKAD CIG MA DANG RANG BZHIN MED PA GNYIS RNAM PA’I YUL DU ‘DOD NA, SNYING RJE GCIG LA ‘DZIN STANGS KYI RNAM PA MI MTHUN PA GNYIS SU ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

First of all, we have to accept the idea that how we think as we feel both these forms of compassion is that we want living beings to be free of suffering.  But if we go on to accept that the two facts of something changing moment by moment, and of lacking any nature of its own, are the objects of our thoughts at this point, then we come up with a single compassion which is entertaining, at the same time, two incompatible ways of thinking about the object it is considering.


[192]
DES NA KHYAD PAR GNYIS KYIS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I SEMS CAN SNYING RJE’I DMIGS PAR ‘JOG PA LA, SNYING RJE GNYIS RGYUD LDAN GYI GANG ZAG GIS SEMS CAN SKAD CIG MA DANG, RANG BZHIN MED PAR SNGON DU NGES ZIN PA LA BRTEN NAS KHYAD CHOS GNYIS KYI RNAM PA SHAR BA CIG DGOS KYI, SNYING RJES DE GNYIS SU DMIGS PA MI DGOS SO,,

Here then is how we actually have to describe the way in which a living being that we are distinguishing in two different ways can be the object upon which compassion is focusing.  A person who had the two forms of compassion in their mind would have had to realize, at some previous point in time, that living beings were both changing moment by moment, and also lacked any nature of their own.  Based on this realization, they could at some later point focus upon beings with these two distinctions still going on in the back of their mind; but we could not say it was the case that their compassion was focusing on these two distinctions themselves.


[193]
RTZA ‘GREL GNYIS KAR SNYING RJE [f. 17a] PHYI MA GNYIS LA SNGAR BSHAD PA’I KHYAD PAR GYIS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I SEMS CAN DMIGS PAR BSHAD LA, SNYING RJE DANG PO LA DE ‘DRA BA’I KHYAD PAR GYIS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA MIN PAR, SEMS CAN TZAM ZHIG DMIGS PAR GSUNGS PAS,

The root text and the Autocommentary both describe the living beings focused upon by the latter two forms of compassion as being distinguished by the features we’ve just mentioned.  The first form of compassion though is not distinguished by such features; thus it is said to focus “on simple living beings.”


[194]
DE LA DGONGS NAS SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE ZHES PA YANG THA SNYAD BDE BA’I PHYIR NYER BSDU’I MING NGO,,

It’s with this fact in mind that we speak of “the compassion which focuses on living beings”—this expression is itself a contraction, used for the sake of convenience.


[195]
DES NA SNYING RJE DANG PO ‘DIS RTAG GCIG RANG DBANG CAN GYI SEMS CAN LA DMIGS DGOS PAR ‘DOD PA NI, MI RIGS PAR SMRA BA STE, BDAG MED PA’I LTA BA MA RNYED PA’I RGYUD KYI SNYING RJE LA YANG SEMS CAN TZAM LA DMIGS NAS SKYE BA DU MA YOD PA’I PHYIR DANG,

Therefore the assertion that this first form of compassion must be focusing on a living being as one which is unchanging, singular, and independent is mistaken.  First of all, there can be many cases where the compassion which arises in the heart of a person who has yet to reach the viewpoint that things are not themselves is one which focuses on a simple living being.


[196]
GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED THUN MONG BA DANG, DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA RNYED PA’I RGYUD LA YANG, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I KHYAD PAR GNYIS GANG GIS KYANG KHYAD PAR DU MA BYAS PA’I SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE DU MA YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And there are also many cases where the compassion which focuses upon living beings—without the two aforementioned distinctions being drawn at all about these beings—can exist in the heart of a person who has reached the general idea of how no person is themselves; and the view of suchness.


[197]
DPER NA BUM PA RTAG PAR ‘DZIN PA’I ZHEN YUL SUN PHYUNGS NAS, MI RTAG PAR KHONG DU CHUD PAS KYANG, BUM PA DMIGS PAR ‘JOG RES KYIS MI RTAG PAS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I BUM PA DMIGS PAR MI ‘JOG PA DU MA ZHIG ‘ONG LA,

Consider, for example, a case where someone had been able to prove to themselves that it was impossible for the object that the idea that a water pitcher is unchanging is grasping on to, to actually exist.  There are still though many cases where they could be taking a water pitcher as the object of their focus and not take as the object of this focus a water pitcher which was distinguished by the quality of being changing.


[198]
BUM PA MI RTAG PAR KHONG DU CHUD PAS KYANG, BUM PA DMIGS PAR ‘JOG RES KYIS RTAG PAS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I BUM PA DMIGS PAR MI ‘JOG PA BZHIN NO,,

They would have already understood that the water pitcher was a changing thing, but it is not the case that in every single subsequent instance in which they focused on this pitcher they never again thought of it as something characterized by being unchanging.


[199]
‘DI’I SNYING RJE GSUM NI DMIGS PA GSUM PO GANG LA [f. 17b] DMIGS KYANG, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD SDUG BSNGAL MTHA’ DAG LAS BSKYAB PAR ‘DOD PA’I RNAM PA CAN YIN PAS, NYAN RANG GI SNYING RJE DANG KHYAD PAR SHIN TU CHE’O,,

Regardless of which of the three objects of focus the three forms of compassion described here take at any particular point, they will always be doing so with the thought that they would like to protect every living creature from every pain there is.  As such they are vastly different from the kinds of compassion felt by listeners & self-made buddhas.


[200]
DE ‘DRA BA’I SNYING RJE RNAMS BSKYED PA NA, SEMS CAN GYI DON DU BDAG GIS SANGS RGYAS KYI GO ‘PHANG CI NAS KYANG THOB PAR BYA’O SNYAM PA’I BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSKYED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Once we have been able to develop the kinds of compassion described here, we are then able to go on and reach the Wish for enlightenment, where we think to ourselves: “No matter what, I will attain the state of a Buddha, for the sake of every living being.”


[201]
MCHOD BRJOD YUL DU GYUR PA’I SNYING RJE NI, THOG MA’I SNYING RJE GTZO BO YIN KYANG, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SNYING RJE GZHAN RNAMS KYANG YIN PAS NA, SKABS ‘DI RNAMS SU ‘GREL PAS SNYING RJE SKYED PA PO BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAR GSUNGS PA RNAMS KYANG MI ‘GAL LO,,

It is the first of the three types of compassion which is main object of the offering of praise; nonetheless, other forms of compassion possessed by bodhisattvas are also included in this object.  As such, references at this point in the Autocommentary which describe the person who reaches the compassion as being a bodhisattva are in no way contradictory.


[202]
‘O NA LAM DU THOG MAR ZHUGS PA’I BYANG SEMS KYI RGYUR GYUR PA’I SNYING RJE DE LA SNYING RJE GSUM GA YOD DAM MED CE NA,

“Well then,” one may ask.  “Let’s talk about the compassion which acts as the cause which brings about a bodhisattva who has just entered the paths.  Can it be any one of these three types of compassion?”


[203]
‘DI LA GNYIS LAS THEG CHEN GYI RIGS CAN CHOS KYI RJES ‘BRANG NI, YANG DAG PA’I DE KHO NA NYID SHES PA TSOL BA SNGON DU BTANG STE, DON DAM PA LEGS PAR GTAN LA PHAB PA’I ‘OG TU SEMS CAN LA SNYING RJE CHEN PO BSKYED PA LA BRTEN NAS, SEMS BSKYED CING THUB PA’I BRTUL ZHUGS BYANG SEMS KYI SPYOD PA LA SLOB BO,,

There are two possibilities here.  Those who belong to the greater-way type and follow after actual things first engage in a pursuit of the knowledge of the absolute purity of suchness.  Only after they have been able to learn all about the ultimate do they come to great compassion for all living beings.  And then based on this compassion they give birth to the Wish for enlightenment and train themselves in the activities of a bodhisattva—the “rigorous way of life followed by the Able Ones.” 


[204]
THEG CHEN GYI RIGS CAN DAD PA’I RJES ‘BRANG NI, SNGON DU DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR MI NUS PAS SEMS BSKYED PA’I ‘OG TU YANG DAG PA’I DON SHES PA TSOL BA LA SOGS PA’I SPYOD PA LA SLOB STE, DBU MA’I RGYAN LAS,

Those who belong to the greater-way type and who follow after faith haven’t the capacity to grasp suchness first.  And so they first develop the Wish for enlightenment and then afterwards engage in the various activities, such as the pursuit of a knowledge of the absolute purity of things.  The Jewel of the Middle Way puts it like this:


[205]
,YANG DAG SHES TSOL SNGON BTANG STE,
,DON DAM RNAM PAR NGES GYUR [f. 18a] NAS,
,LTA NGAN THIBS GNAS ‘JIG RTEN LA,
,SNYING RJE KUN TU BSKYED NAS SU,

First they engage in a pursuit
Of the knowledge of absolute purity;

Once they’ve realized the ultimate,
Then all their mistaken views collapse,

And compassion bursts forth in their heart
For all the entire world.


[206]
,’GRO DON BYED PAR DPA’ GYUR PA,
,BYANG CHUB BLO RGYAS MKHAS PA NI,
,BLO DANG SNYING RJES BRGYAN PA YI,
,THUB PA’I BRTUL ZHUGS YANG DAG SPYOD,

These wise & intelligent bodhisattvas,
Warriors in the service of others,
Covered in jewels of compassion & knowledge,

Keep then to the rigorous way of life
Followed by the Able Ones.


[207]
,YANG DAG DAD PAS RJES ‘BRANG BA,
,RDZOGS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS BSKYED NAS,
,THUB PA’I BRTUL ZHUGS BLANGS BYAS TE,
,DE NI YANG DAG SHES TSOL BRTZON,

Those who follow after perfect faith
First reach the Wish for complete enlightenment;

Then they take up those rigors of the Able,
And strive in the pursuit
Of the knowledge of absolute purity.


[208]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR YIN PAS SNYING RJE GSUM GA SNGON DU SKYED PA YOD DO,,

As these lines are describing, there are cases where all three forms of compassion are developed first.


[209]
SNGON DU DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA RNYED KYANG SPYOD PA LA SLOB PA’I DUS SU YANG, DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON GTAN LA PHAB NAS, DE LA SLOB PA LA ‘GAL BA MED PA TZAM DU MA ZAD TSUL DE NGES PAR BYA DGOS PA YIN NO,,

One may, by the way, have previously reached the view of suchness; during the period that one is training oneself in the various activities, though, a person may continue to work out the meaning of suchness further.  In fact it’s not only that this kind of thing is not a contradiction at this point; rather, it is without question necessary during this time.


[210]
DE LTAR MCHOD PAR BRJOD NAS BRTZAM PAR DAM BCA’ BA DNGOS SU MA MDZAD KYANG SKYON MED DE, DBU MA RTZA BA DANG RIGS PA DRUG CU PA BZHIN NO,,

It’s not a problem that our author here makes the traditional offering of praise but then undertakes no direct commitment to compose the work afterwards, as can also be traditional.  We can point to similar examples with the foundational verses of Wisdom, and the Sixty Verses as well.


[211]
DE BZHIN DU BRTZAM PAR DAM BCA’ MDZAD NAS, MCHOD BRJOD DNGOS SU MA MDZAD PA BSHES PA’I ‘PHRIN YIG LTA BU YANG YOD DO,,

There are also cases where the author makes a commitment to compose the work, and then adds no direct offering of praise; we can take The Letter to a Friend as an example.


[212]
‘ON KYANG DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA RTZOM PAR ‘DOD NAS MCHOD BRJOD MDZAD PA YIN PAS, SHUGS LA NI BRTZAM PAR DAM BCA’ BA YOD DO,,

In the case of Entering the Middle Way though we can say that the author has written the offering of praise because he wishes to compose the work; and so the traditional commitment to compose the work may be assumed.



The purpose & the connection

[213]
GZHAN ‘JUG PA’I YAN LAG DGOS ‘BREL LA BRJOD BYA NI, ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA GNYIS YIN LA, THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I DGOS PA NI BSHAD ZIN TO,,

This brings us to the preliminaries of the composition which are meant to inspire others to engage in the work: what we sometimes call “the purpose & the connection.”  The first traditional part is called “a statement of the subject matter”—which in this case includes both the profound teachings and the widespread teachings.  The second part, what we call the “unique purpose,” has already been covered.


[214]
NYING DGOS LA GNAS SKABS PA NI BSTAN BCOS KYI DON SHES PA NYAMS SU [f. 18b] LEN PA NAS BZUNG STE LAM BZHI BGROD PA’O, ,MTHAR THUG PA NI ‘BRAS BU’I SA’O,,

The immediate point of the third part—what is named the “ultimate purpose”—extends from coming to an understanding of the subject matter of this classical commentary, up through putting it into practice as we pass through four of the paths.  The final point of this part is to reach the level of the final goal.


[215]
NYING DGOS DGOS PA LA RAG LAS PA DANG, DGOS PA BSTAN BCOS LA RAG LAS PA NI ‘BREL BA’O,,

The fourth part is known as “the connection”; here, it is reflected in the fact that fulfilling the essential purpose depends upon fulfilling the simple purpose—and fulfilling this purpose depends upon a study of the commentary.



A general discussion of how we practice this path

[216]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, RGYU’I SA DANG, ‘BRAS BU’I SA’O,,

This brings us to the second major division of our discussion of the body of the text, which is the explanation of the actual body of the commentary composed after the offering of praise has been completed.  We proceed in two steps: a presentation of the levels which act as a cause; and then a presentation of those which consist of the result.


[217]
DANG PO LA GSUM, LUGS ‘DI’I LAM NYAMS SU LEN TSUL SPYIR BSTAN PA DANG, BYE BRAG TU SO SKYE’I SAR NYAMS SU LEN TSUL BSHAD PA DANG, BYANG SEMS ‘PHAGS PA’I SA’I RNAM GZHAG BSTAN PA’O,,

The first of these has three divisions of its own: a general discussion of how it is that we put the path of this system into practice; a more specific explanation of how we practice upon the levels for common beings; and finally a presentation on the structure of the levels for realized beings who are bodhisattvas.


[218]
DANG PO NI, GAL TE BSTAN BCOS ‘DIR BYANG SEMS KYI ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I LAM KLU SGRUB KYI RJES SU ‘BRANGS TE GTAN LA ‘BEBS NA, RE ZHIG MGON PO KLU SGRUB KYI LUGS KYIS SANGS RGYAS KYI SAR BGROD PA’I LAM GYI RIM PA CI ‘DRA BA ZHIG BZHED CE NA,

For the first, one may begin with the following question:

So the goal of this classical commentary is to provide a presentation of the profound & widespread paths of the bodhisattva, following the teachings of Nagarjuna.  Here then at the beginning, can you give us an outline of the steps of the path for travelling to the state of a Buddha, according to the system accepted by our savior, Nagarjuna?


[219]
DE LA SANGS RGYAS GNYIS PA KLU SGRUB ZHABS LA SOGS PA’I LUGS THOS BSAM GYIS GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA NI, RANG GIS YANG DAG PA’I LAM NYAMS SU LEN TSUL LA NGES PA CHEN PO RNYED NAS, LAM LTAR SNANG RNAMS KYIS BKRI BAR MI NUS PA’I CHED DU YIN NO,,

Now the whole purpose of undertaking learning & contemplation in order to come to an understanding of the system of that second Buddha, the great Nagarjuna, is so that—by reaching a deep place of certainty in our own practice of the correct path—we can assure that it is impossible for us ever to be misdirected to some mistaken path.


[220]
DE’I PHYIR SHING RTA CHEN PO RNAMS KYI LUGS KYI GZHUNG LA CI TZAM SBYANGS KYANG, RANG GI LAM NYAMS SU LEN PA’I TSUL LA NGES PA CI YANG MI RNYED PA’I THOS BSAM PA NI, THOS BSAM BYED TSUL GNAD DU MA SONG BA’I PHYIR,

Thus we can say that—no matter how much a person trains themselves in the classics of the schools of the great innovators—the way in which they undertake study & contemplation misses the mark if this learning & thinking doesn’t at all result in their coming to some place of certainty in their own actual practice of the path.


[221]
THEG PA CHEN PO LA NGAL BAR BYAS KYANG SNYING PO LEGS PAR MI LON PAS NA, LAM BGROD PA’I RIM PA RNAMS SHES PA LA ‘BAD PAR BYA’O,,

They can then be expending themselves in efforts to follow the greater way, but still fail to really get the essence.  As such, we must exert ourselves in the task of learning the various formal stages for travelling the path.


[222]
KLU’I ZHABS KYIS LAM GYI CHA [f. 19a] PHYOGS RE BSHAD PA MANG YANG ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA GNYIS KA LAS BRTZAMS PA’I LAM GYI LUS STON PA’I GZHUNG GSUM LAS,

The magnificent Nagarjuna has composed a great number of explanations of specific individual components of the path; but there are three of his classic presentations which base their structure upon both the profound & the widespread sides of the teachings.


[223]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS GSUNGS TSUL LA, DE YI RTZA BA BYANG CHUB SEMS, ,ZHES PA DANG, SNYING RJE SNGON BTANG SPYOD KUN DANG, ZHES SOGS NI SNGAR DRANGS ZIN LA,

Here is how the first of these, the String of Precious Jewels, makes its presentation.  We have already quoted several sections, such as the one which speaks of “its roots, a Wish for enlightenment,” and another which mentions “that entire way of life, ushered in by compassion.”


[224]
YANG DE NYID LAS,

The same work also includes the following lines—


[225]
,DE LA BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ YI,
,YON TAN MDOR BSTAN BYA BA NI,
,SBYIN DANG TSUL KHRIMS BZOD BRTZON ‘GRUS,
,BSAM GTAN SHES RAB SNYING RJE SOGS,

We may summarize, briefly,
The high qualities of the bodhisattva

As giving; an ethical way of life;
Patience; joyful effort;
Meditation; wisdom;
Compassion; and others as well.


[226]
,SBYIN PA RANG DON YONGS BTANG BA,
,TSUL KHRIMS GZHAN PHAN BYA BA’O,,
BZOD PA KHRO BA SPANGS PA STE,
,DKAR PO’I CHOS SPEL BRTZON ‘GRUS SO,

Giving is to give away
All that you ever wanted;

The ethical life means doing things
Of benefit to others.
Patience is to give up anger,

And effort is working to increase
The good parts of ourselves.


[227]
,BSAM GTAN RTZE GCIG NYON MONGS MED,
,SHES RAB BDEN DON GTAN LA ‘BEBS,
,SNYING BRTZE SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LA,
,SNYING RJE RO GCIG BLO GROS SO,

Meditation is a mind single-pointed,
And free of negativity;

Wisdom works out the meaning
Of true reality.

Compassion is a kind of intelligence
Which sings a single song
Of love for every single being.


[228]
,SBYIN PAS LONGS SPYOD KHRIMS KYIS BDE,
,BZOD PAS MDANGS LDAN BRTZON PAS BRJID,
,BSAM GTAN GYIS ZHI BLO YIS GROL,
,SNYING BRTZE BAS NI DON KUN SGRUB,

Giving brings us prosperity;
An ethical life brings happiness;

Patience brings a lovely face,
And effort brings respect.

Meditation leads to peace,
Understanding liberates us,
And compassion accomplishes all things.


[229]
,BDUN PO ‘DI DAG MA LUS PAR,
,CIG CAR PHA ROL PHYIN PA YIS,
,YE SHES BSAM GYIS MI KHYAB YUL,
,’JIG RTEN MGON PO NYID THOB ‘GYUR,

If we can reach the perfection
Of all these seven together,

Then we can reach that object
Of inconceivable wisdom,

And become ourselves that one & only
Savior of the world.


[230]
ZHES PHYIN DRUG GI NGOS ‘DZIN DANG, ,PHAN YON DANG SNYING RJE’I GROGS DANG BCAS PA LA BSLAB PAR GSUNGS TE, SPYOD PA’I RTEN SEMS BSKYED PA SNGON DU BTANG BA DANG, SPYOD PA DES BYANG SEMS KYI SA BCU BGROD PAR GSUNGS SO,,

These verses serve to identify for us the six perfections, covering as well the benefits that they bring to us, and the way in which we train ourselves in them, by combining them with the attitude of compassion.  They speak of how first we utilize the Wish for enlightenment—which serves as a foundation for the activities of the bodhisattva—and then undertake those activities to complete our journey through the ten bodhisattva levels.


[231]
CHOS DBYINGS BSTOD PA LAS KYANG, SKYABS [f. 19b] SU SONG NAS SEMS BSKYED PA DANG, PHAR PHYIN BCUS KHAMS RGYAS PAR BYED PA DANG, BYANG SEMS KYI SA BCU GSUNGS SO,,

The Praise of the Realm of Reality also speaks of developing the Wish for enlightenment once one has gone for refuge; of how we use the ten perfections to expand our potential; and of the ten levels of the bodhisattva.


[232]
LAM GYI LUS KYI SDOM RAGS PA CIG MDZAD PA DE, MDO KUN LAS BTUS LAS RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA NA, DAL ‘BYOR DANG BSTAN PA LA DAD PA RNYED DKA’ BA DANG, DE DAG LAS KYANG BYANG CHUB TU SEMS BSKYED PA RNYED DKA’ BAR GSUNGS LA,

The Compendium of All the Sutras further devotes an extensive section to a rough summary of the entire length of the path.  Here it describes how difficult it is to find the various forms of leisure & fortune, and faith in the teachings.  It goes on to say how even more difficult it is to reach the Wish for enlightenment.


[233]
SEMS CAN RNAMS LA SNYING RJE CHE BA YANG RNYED DKA’ BA DANG, SNGAR BSHAD PA RNAMS LAS KYANG, BYANG SEMS LA RMA ‘BYIN PA’I LAS SGRIB DANG, DE LA BRNYAS PA’I SEMS DANG, BDUD KYI LAS DANG, DAM CHOS SPONG BA SOGS SPONG BA RNYED DKA’ BA SOGS KYI BSHAD PA MANG DU GSUNGS SO,,

This text also describes how difficult it is to develop great compassion for living beings—and it continues by saying that it is even more difficult than all of these to reach a point where we can remove a karmic obstacle created by speaking badly of a bodhisattva, or even just thinking badly of them; or else eliminate the influence of negative spirits; or stop ourselves from actions which consist of rejecting the Dharma, or anything of the like.  We see many such discussions there.


[234]
‘DI SNGA MA GNYIS LA LTOS NA GSAL MOD KYANG, DA DUNG LAM GYI RIM PA RNAMS RTOGS DKA’ BA LA, SLOB DPON GYI LUGS ‘DZIN CHEN PO ZHI BA LHAS, SPYIR BSLAB SPYOD GNYIS KA DANG KHYAD PAR DU MDO BTUS KYI DON GYI ‘GREL PA BSLAB BTUS LAS SHIN TU GSAL ZHING RGYAS PAR GSUNGS TE,

It is admittedly true that this last work gives a more explicit presentation than the two mentioned before it; but certain steps of the path can still be difficult for a person to grasp.  And so Shantideva, that great upholder of the system of the Master, has described these steps even more explicitly, and in much greater detail, in a general way in his Compendium of All the Trainings and his Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life—and in a much more specific way in his Compendium of All the Trainings which is a commentary explaining the meaning of the Compendium of All the Sutras.


[235]
THOG MAR DAL ‘BYOR DON CHE ZHING SHIN TU RNYED DKA’ BA BSAMS NAS, TSE ‘DIR SNYING PO LEN PA’I PHAN PA SEMS PA DANG, DE NAS DAD PA SPYI DANG KHYAD PAR DU THEG PA CHEN PO’I YON TAN BSAM PA’I DAD PA BRTAN PO BSKYED DE,

That is, he is saying, we first contemplate upon the great importance of the leisure and fortune we have found in this life, and how extremely difficult it is to find.  Then we think on the benefit of getting the very essence out of our lifetime here.  This leads, in general, to feelings of faith; and more specifically to a solid faith in which we consider the high qualities of the path of the greater way.


[236]
SMON PA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSKYED PA DANG, DE NAS ‘JUG PA’I SDOM PA BZUNG BA DANG, DE NAS LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD DGE RTZA GSUM BTANG BA DANG, BSRUNG BA DANG, DAG PAR BYED [f. 20a] PA DANG, SPEL BA’I TSUL RNAMS GSAL BAR GSUNGS PA ‘DIS, MDO KUN LAS BTUS BSHAD PAR BYA’O,,

This in turn leads to developing the Wish for enlightenment in the form of an intention—which inspires us to commit ourselves to the vows for this Wish in the form of actual action.  And then we can give away the three of our body, our possessions, and our store of good deeds.  We can honor, we can purify, we can increase.  Our author explicitly describes the way of doing these things; and thus do “I explain the Compendium of All the Sutras.”


[237]
BZHI BRGYA PAR YANG ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I LAM GYI LUS GSUNGS LA, DBU MA SNYING PO DANG, DBU MA RGYAN DANG, DBU MA’I SGOM RIM GSUM LAS BSDUS TE GSUNGS PA’I LUS RNAMS KYANG ‘DRA BAS, ‘PHAGS PA’I LUGS ‘DZIN PA’I CHEN PO THAMS CAD LAM GYI KHOG LA ‘DRA’O,,

The paths of both the profound and the widespread sides of the teaching are also recounted in The 400 Verses.  The content of the briefer presentations of them found in three works—The Heart of the Middle Way, The Jewel of the Middle Way, and The Steps of Meditation on the Middle Way—is also similar; and so we can say that the general shape of the path painted by the great upholders of the system of the Realized Being is always the same.


[238]
‘DI RNAMS LA NGES PA BDE BLAG TU STER BA’I THABS LAS DANG PO PAS ‘JUG PA BDE BA NI SHING RTA CHEN PO’I LUGS GNYIS LA MKHAS PA’I DPAL MAR ME MDZAD KYI GDAMS NGAG BYANG CHUB LAM GYI RIM PAR, SHIN TU GO SLA BA’I ‘KHRID TSUL BSTAN PA LAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

One way to gain, without great effort, a good understanding of these classics is through a study of the Steps on the Path to Enlightenment, a book of advice which is easily covered even by beginners, and which was composed by the glorious Dipankara, a master of the systems of both the great innovators.  This text makes its presentation in a way which is understood with great ease.



Practicing the levels for common beings

[239]
GNYIS PA NI, GAL TE BSTAN BCOS ‘DIR BYANG SEMS KYI LAM ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA GNYIS KA DANG, DES THOB PAR BYA BA’I ‘BRAS BU GTAN LA ‘BEBS NA, BYANG SEMS LA GAL SHIN TU CHE BA’I SO SKYE’I SA’I LAM GYI RIM PA RNAMS, MCHOD BRJOD KYI ‘OG ‘DIR BSTAN DGOS PA LAS, DER MI STON PAR ‘PHAGS PA’I SA NYID NAS ‘CHAD PA JI LTAR RIGS SNYAM NA,

This brings us to the second division in our presentation of the levels that act as a cause, which is a more specific explanation of how we practice upon the levels for common beings.  One may begin with the following question:

Let’s assume then that the purpose of the classical commentary we are covering here is to set forth both the profound & widespread divisions of the path of the bodhisattva—as well as the goal which we achieve by following these divisions.  It would seem necessary, since they are so crucial for bodhisattvas, to present here—right after the offering of praise—the steps of the path contained in the levels for common beings.  And yet the text does not follow this approach, but rather begins the discussion from nothing less than the levels of the bodhisattva.  How could this be right?


[240]
‘DI NI MCHOD BRJOD KYI SKABS NYID DU BSHAD PAS, SKABS ‘DIR MA BSHAD DO, ,DE’I DGOS PA NI GANG BSGOMS PA LA BRTEN NAS BYANG SEMS SU ‘GYUR BA’I RGYU’I GTZO BO GSUM BSTAN PAS, THEG CHEN DU ‘JUG PAR ‘DOD PAS DE GSUM THOG MAR NYAMS SU BLANG DGOS PAR [f. 20b] BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This question has already been covered, in the section on the offering of praise itself; as such, we will not go through it again here.  The point of doing it this way though is that the text first presents the three principal causes which—once one meditates upon them—lead one to become a bodhisattva.  This is in order to indicate that those who wish to enter the greater way must first put into practice these three.


[241]
DE GSUM NI SNGON DU NYAMS SU LEN DGOS PAR MA ZAD, BYANG SEMS SU GYUR NAS KYANG NYAMS SU BLANG DGOS PA LA, GNYIS LA MI RTEN PA’I YE SHES NI SPYOD PA’I GTZO BO YIN PAS, DES MTSON NAS SBYIN SOGS KYI SPYOD PA GZHAN LA SLOB PA YANG GO DGOS SO,,

Not only must one put these three into practice before becoming a bodhisattva—they must also be practiced even after a person has already become one.  The primary practice within all the activities of a bodhisattva is that of the wisdom which no longer rests in the two extremes.  The practice of this wisdom then represents the practice of all the other bodhisattva activities—giving & the rest.  When the presentation is done as it is, it is meant to help us understand this fact.


[242]
DE YANG MDO KUN LAS BTUS PA LAS, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ THABS LA MKHAS PA DANG BRAL BAR CHOS NYID ZAB MO LA SBYAR BAR MI BYA STE, ‘DI LTAR THABS DANG SHES RAB  ZUNG DU ‘BREL BA NI, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS KYI SBYOR BA YANG DAG PA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR

This follows the Compendium of All the Sutras, where it states—

A bodhisattva who is without skillful means fails to apply themselves to the profound nature of things.  When one rather combines both method & wisdom in the way we’ve described, this becomes the perfect practice of a bodhisattva.


[243]
TSOGS GNYIS ZUNG DU ‘BREL BA LA BSLAB DGOS KYI, THABS SHES PHYOGS RE BAS CHOG SHES BYED PA DANG, THABS SHES KHYAD PAR CAN GANG YANG MED PA’I SEMS RTZE GCIG PA TZAM LA YID BRTAN PAR MI BYA’O,,

The point is that we must practice the two accumulations in tandem: we must not satisfy ourselves with practicing just one side or the other—method or wisdom; and we must not put all our faith in a single-pointed state of mind alone—in one which lacks any extraordinary form of method & wisdom.


[244]
DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PAS DGAG BYA ‘GOG PA’I SA MTSAMS MA ZIN PAR THAMS CAD BKAG PAR MTHONG STE, RTOG PA GANG YIN THAMS CAD BDEN ‘DZIN DU ‘KHRUL BAS,

We do see people who fail to draw the correct line concerning how far we should go in denying the existence of what the concept of emptiness negates; that is, they fail in how they apply the various forms of reasoning which explore the idea of suchness.  And then they end up denying the existence of everything: they mistake all forms of discursive thought for the tendency to hold things as real.


[245]
THA SNYAD KYI RNAM GZHAG THAMS CAD GZHAN NGO KHO NA LA SKYEL BA DANG, ‘BRAS BU’I SKABS SU YE SHES KYIS STONG PA’I DE BZHIN NYID TZAM ZHIG GI CHOS SKU LAS MED CING, GZUGS KYI SKU GDUL BYA’I SHES RGYUD KYIS BSDUS PAR ‘DOD PA RNAMS LA NI,

Because of this they assert that the entire presentation upon how things do exist nominally was made only to satisfy those of other schools.  And they must also then assert that—at the stage where we have reached the final goal—there is nothing left but a body of reality which consists only of the ultimate nature of things, devoid of the attribute of wisdom.  At this point as well they must assert that the body of form is actually subsumed by the mental continua of the disciples experiencing it.


[246]
NYAN RANG GNYIS THUB DBANG LAS SKYES PA DANG, SANGS RGYAS BYANG SEMS LAS ‘KHRUNGS PAR LUNG RIGS KYIS BSGRUBS PA SOGS THAMS CAD DBU MA [f. 21a] LA ‘JUG PA’I LUGS MIN PAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

And by that point, nothing like this whole exercise where we use both scriptural authority and logical reasoning to establish that the two of listeners & self-made buddhas are born from the Lords of the Able—and that Buddhas themselves take their holy birth from bodhisattvas—can any longer represent the system of Entering the Middle Way.


[247]
CHOS GSUM BSGOM PA YANG BYANG SEMS DBU MA PA’I LUGS MIN PAR GZHAN NGO TZAM DU BZHAG PA’O, ZHES PAS RANG NGOS NAS LAM NYAMS SU BLANG DGOS PA THAMS CAD LA SKUR BA BTAB CING,

There are also those who say that “even following these three practices is something that was taught for those of other schools, and is not the system followed by bodhisattvas who belong to the middle way.”  These kind of people are failing to show any respect for the path that they themselves will eventually need to walk.


[248]
RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA’I SEMS CAN ZO CHUN DANG CHOS MTHUN DRUG GIS ‘KHOR BAR BSHAD PA RNAMS ‘GAL ‘DU ‘BA’ ZHIG TU ‘GYUR BAS,

Their thinking stands in total contradiction to the presentation on how living beings who are devoid of any natural existence spin through the cycle of life in a manner which is similar, in six different ways, to the way in which a water wheel turns.


[249]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I MCHOD BRJOD NAS BZUNG STE, GZHUNG GI DON LOG PAR ‘CHAD PA LA ZHUGS PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And so our readers should understand that the way they explain the entire text of Entering the Middle Way, from the offering of praise down to the last page, is completely mistaken.


[250]
SBYIN SOGS LA SLOB TSUL ‘PHAGS PA’I SA’I SKABS SU BSHAD PA RNAMS LA’ANG SO SKYE’I SA NAS KYANG, NYAMS SU BLANG BYA’I SPYOD PA MANG DU YOD PA RNAMS SHES PAR BYAS NAS, DA LTA NAS KYANG NYAMS SU BLANG BA LA ‘BAD PAR BYA’O,,

They should also understand that there are a great many activities that come from the levels of common beings and which should still be followed while we undertake the practice of giving & the rest, as these are described for individuals who have reached the levels of those who are realized.  These are practices which our readers can in fact begin to work on immediately.



A combined presentation of the ten levels

[251]
GSUM PA LA GSUM, SA BCU’I THUN MONG GI RNAM GZHAG, SA SO SO’I RNAM GZHAG, SA BCU’I YON TAN BSTAN PA’O,,

This brings us to the third point in our explanation of the levels which act as a cause, which is a presentation on the structure of the levels for realized beings who are bodhisattvas.  We will cover this subject in three different steps: a combined presentation of the ten levels; a separate presentation for each one of these levels; and then a description of the high good qualities of the ten.


[252]
DANG PO NI, ‘DIR RAB DGA’ SOGS SA BCU GCIG BSHAD PA NI, RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,

Here is the first.  Our presentation here on eleven levels—Perfect Happiness & the rest—is based upon the following lines from The String of Precious Jewels which speak of ten levels, and a broad presentation of eleven levels:


	[253]
,JI LTAR NYAN THOS THEG PA LA,
,NYAN THOS SA NI BRGYAD BSHAD PA,
,DE BZHIN THEG PA CHEN PO LA,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SA BCU’O,
ZHES SA BCU DANG, BCU GCIG PA’I RNAM GZHAG RAGS PA CIG GSUNGS PA LA GZHI MDZAD CING,

For the way of the listeners,
We see a description
Of eight different listener levels.

Just so, for the greater way,
There are ten bodhisattva levels.


[254]
SA BCU PA’I MDO LA YANG BRTEN NAS MDZAD DE, DE LA RAB DGA’ SOGS SA [f. 21b] BCU LA SEMS BSKYED PA BCUR BSHAD PA NI, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED LA DGONGS SO,,

Our explanation is also based upon The Sutra on the Ten Levels.  In this scripture, the ten levels—Perfect Happiness & the rest—are spoken of as the “ten forms of the Wish for enlightenment.”  We are meant to understand that this is a reference to the ultimate form of this Wish.


[255]
DON DAM SEMS BSKYED DU BZHAG PA’I SA BCU’I NGO BO NI, ‘GREL PA LAS, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS KYI ZAG PA MED PA’I YE SHES SNYING RJE LA SOGS PAS ZIN PA NYID CHAR RNAM PAR PHYE BA NA, SA ZHES BYA BA’I MING ‘THOB STE YON TAN GYI GNAS SU ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES SA YI NGO BO DANG GANG GIS YONGS SU ZIN PA DANG, SA’I MING ‘THOB TSUL DANG, SGRA’I DON BSHAD PA BZHIS BSTAN NO,,

What is the very essence of the ten levels which we describe as the ultimate form of the Wish?  The commentary gives the presentation in four parts: the essence of the levels; what it is that imbues them; how they came to be given the name “level”; and the literal meaning of their name—

The immaculate wisdom of the bodhisattvas—always imbued with compassion & the rest—may be divided into certain parts.  These are given the name level [or ground], for they are the places where high personal qualities are found.


[256]
ZAG PA MED PA’I YE SHES ZHES PA’I NGO BO NI, KHA CIG MDZOD NAS BSHAD PA LTAR GYI ZAG PA RGYAS SU MI RUNG BA LA ZAG MED DU ‘CHAD PA NI, LUGS ‘DI’I ZAG MED DU ‘JOG PA’I DON THUN MONG MA YIN PA MA RTOGS PAR SNANG BAS,

What then is the essence of immaculate wisdom?  Some have glossed “immaculate” here as it is explained in The Treasure House—as referring to an instance where stains can no longer spread.  It would appear that these people have failed to grasp the unique way in which something is described as “immaculate” in this particular system.


[257]
RANG GI LUGS NI BDEN ‘DZIN GYI MA RIG PA DANG, DE’I BAG CHAGS GANG RUNG GIS BSLAD PA NI ZAG BCAS DANG, BSLAD PA DE DANG BRAL BA’I YE SHES NI ZAG PA MED PA YIN TE,

According to our own system, something is “stained” when it is infected either by misunderstanding in the form of believing that things are real, or by the seeds for this tendency—or by both.  “Unstained” or “immaculate” then refers to the state of understanding which is free of such infection.


[258]
TSIG GSAL LAS, MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB DANG BRAL BA DAG GI YE SHES ZAG PA MED PA’I YUL GYI RANG BZHIN LA LTOS NAS NI MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA BZHIN NO,,

As A Clarification of the Verses puts it,

What we refer to as “immaculate” is the wisdom of those which are freed of the cataract of misunderstanding; it is not, rather, a term applied according to the nature of a particular object.


[259]
DE YANG SANGS RGYAS KYI SA MA THOB TSUN CHAD DU MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS KYIS MA BSLAD PA’I SHES PA NI, ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS KYI MNYAM GZHAG MI RTOG PA’I YE SHES MIN PA MED LA, DE YANG RES ‘JOG PA STE MNYAM GZHAG LAS LANGS PA NA BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD PA CAN DU SKYE’O,,

Now except for the non-conceptual wisdom of realized beings in their deep state of meditation, there is no state of mind (short of the one possessed by a person who has reached the level of Buddhahood) which is not infected by the seed for the tendency to misunderstand things.  Even this wisdom though is variable, in the sense that—when these beings come out of this type of meditation—their mind again takes on that infection by the seed for this tendency.


[260]
SA [f. 22a] BDUN PA’I BAR DU NI MA RIG PAS SLOD PA YOD LA, SA BRGYAD PA NAS DANG DGRA BCOM PA GNYIS LA NI, SLOD BYED KYI MA RIG PA ZAD PAS, DES BSLAD PA MED KYI MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD PA NI YOD DO,,

Up through the seventh bodhisattva level, our mind is still infected by the misunderstanding itself.  In two cases though—from the eighth level on up, and with enemy destroyers—the misunderstanding which does the infecting is finished off.  Thus it is no longer infecting our mind; but we do still have infection going on by the mental seed for this tendency to misunderstand.


[261]
YANG ‘GREL PAR SA DANG PO LA GNYIS SU MED PA’I YE SHES KYI MING CAN ZHES GSUNGS PA NI, YUL YUL CAN RGYANGS CHAD DU GNYIS SU SNANG BA MED PA LA ZER GYI, MTHA’ GNYIS SPANGS PA TZAM GYI YE SHES LA MI BYA’O,,

And when the commentary speaks of something “having the name” of “wisdom beyond duality” at the first bodhisattva level, it is referring to a lack of duality in the sense of subject and the object appearing to be divorced one from the other; not to a state of understanding in which we have eliminated no more than the two extremes. 


[262]
SLOB DPON ‘DI’I GZHUNG DU MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB DANG BRAL BA’I SHES RAB DANG YE SHES, ZHES DU MA ZHIG GSUNGS PAS MA RIG PA DANG, DE’I BAG CHAGS RIG PA’I KHYAB BYED DU BYAS NAS, DE GNYIS ZAD PA NA YE SHES KYANG LDOG PA SLOB DPON ‘DI’I LUGS SU SMRA BA NI, 

In the classics written by this particular master, we see frequent references to the “wisdom” or “understanding” which is “free of the cataract of misunderstanding.”  And then some people have claimed that what this means is that the tendency to misunderstand—and the mental seed which causes this tendency—themselves subsume our very consciousness.  They say that when we finish off the two, then, we also put a stop to the understanding itself—and they conclude by stating that this idea expresses the system of the present master.


[263]
MU STEGS DPYOD PA BA DRI MA ZAD NA SEMS KYANG ZAD PAR ‘DOD PA LTAR SMRA BA’I SKUR ‘DEBS CHEN PO YIN LA, ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG NA YE SHES MED ZER BA YANG DE DANG ‘DRA’O,,

This though is a tremendous philosophical debasement, on the order of the belief of the “Examinist” school of the early Hindus where they say that—when we finish off mental impurities—we finish off the mind itself as well.  Claiming that there is no wisdom present in the mind of a realized being engaged in deep meditation is also similar.


[264]
RIN CHEN PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,DE PHYIR DE LTAR MTHONG BA GROL,
,GANG GIS MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,
,THA SNYAD DU NI SEMS LA BRJOD,

The String of Precious Jewels says as well—

Therefore anyone
Who sees things this way
Is freed;

And if you ask
Who it is
That sees,

Our answer is that
It’s the mind,
In a nominal way.


[265]
,CES YUL CAN GYI BYED PA CI ‘DRA BA ZHIG GIS DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA DRIS PA’I LAN DU, THA SNYAD DU SEMS KYIS DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BAR GSUNGS SHING,

This section constitutes a question: “What kind of action, by what subject, is it that allows us to see suchness directly?”  And in answer it says, “It is the mind which, in a nominal way, sees suchness directly.”


[266]
CHOS DBYINGS BSTOD PA LAS KYANG,
,JI LTAR ME YIS DAG PA’I GOS,
,SNA TSOGS DRI MAS DRI [f. 22b] MA CAN,
,JI LTAR ME YI NANG BCUG NA,
,DRI MA ‘TSIG ‘GYUR GOS MIN LTAR,

The Praise of the Realm of Reality also says,

Think of how you put
A piece of cloth resistant to fire
But which has all sorts of stains
Into the middle of a fire.

The stains are burned,
But not the cloth.


	[267]
,DE BZHIN ‘OD GSAL BA YI SEMS,
,’DOD CHAGS LAS SKYES DRI MA CAN,
,YE SHES ME YIS DRI MA SREG
,DE NYID ‘OD GSAL MA YIN NO,

It’s the same with the mind,
The mind of clear light.

It may possess the various stains
Which come from feelings of desire,

But when the fire of wisdom comes
And burns the stains,
It cannot burn the clear light itself.


[268]
ZHES RDO RGYUS KYI GOS DRI MA CAN MER BCUG PA NA, MES DRI MA TSIG KYANG GOS MI ‘TSIG PA LTAR, SEMS KYI DRI MA YE SHES KYI MES BSREGS PA NA, DRI MA SREG PA YIN GYI ‘OD GSAL BA’I SEMS MED PAR MI ‘GYUR BAR GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that, when we take a fire-resistant cloth—one with various stains—into the fire, the fire burns away the stains, but not the cloth itself.  And when the stains in the mind are burned away by the fire of understanding, the stains are burned; but it is not as if the mind of clear light itself disappears.


[269]
BYANG SEMS ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG YE SHES DANG, NYAN RANG ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG YE SHES GNYIS, MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS KYIS MA BSLAD PAR CHOS NYID MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PAR MTSUNGS KYANG, 

Now it is the case that the deep meditative wisdom of a realized being who is a bodhisattva—and the deep meditative wisdom of realized beings who are listeners & self-made buddhas—are equivalent, in seeing the true nature of things directly, without being infected by mental seeds for the tendency to misunderstand things.


[270]
BYANG SEMS ‘PHAGS PA’I SAR ‘JOG MI ‘JOG GI KHYAD PAR NI, SNYING RJE CHEN PO’I GZHAN DBANG DU GYUR MA GYUR DANG, YON TAN BRGYA PHRAG BCU GNYIS SOGS KYI NUS PA YOD MED KYI DBANG GI YIN NO,,

The distinction though of whether either one is said to be the level of a bodhisattva who is a realized being is drawn on the basis of whether the person has become a slave to great compassion or not; and whether or not they possess the power of things like the twelve sets of 100 high qualities each.


[271]
GZHAN YANG SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR TSOGS SBYOR GYI SKABS SU, BDAG MED GNYIS KYI DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON LA, RIGS PA’I RNAM GRANGS DPAG TU MED PA’I SGO NAS, ZAB DON LA BLO RGYAS PA DANG MA RGYAS PA LAS DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU RTOGS MA RTOGS KYI KHYAD PAR YANG SHIN TU CHE’O,,

There is also a vast difference (as we have mentioned previous) between different ways in which one has perceived suchness; that is, a difference in whether the person’s mind has been “opened” or not towards this profound object, by their utilizing an infinite number of different forms of reasoning—during their time on the paths of accumulation & preparation—to explore the meaning of suchness, as far as the two ways in which objects lack any self-nature.


[272]
CHAR PHYE BA NA ZHES PA NI CHA CAN ZAG MED KYI YE SHES GCIG NYID KYI CHA SO SO SOR RIM GYIS PHYE BA’I SNGA PHYI’I CHA RNAMS SA SO SOR ‘GYUR BA STE,

The reference above to “division into certain parts” is meant to convey that there is a single whole: immaculate wisdom.  We divide it into sections as it continues on, and thus arrive at progressive parts which we refer to as “bodhisattva levels.”


[273]
SA ZHES [f. 23a] PA NI YON TAN GYI GNAS SAM RTEN BYED PAS, SA DANG ‘DRA BAS DE LTAR BSNYAD PA’O, ,DE DAG GIS NI DON DAM PA’I SA BCU KA YANG MI RTOG YE SHES NYID LA ‘JOG PAR BSTAN NO,,

When we say “level,” we are applying the name in the sense of “ground,” in that these levels are similar to solid ground as they provide the place or support for the development of high spiritual qualities.


[274]
DE MTSUNGS KYANG RAB DGA’ SOGS SA SO SOR ‘JOG TSUL NI, BZHI’I SGO NAS ‘JOG PA’I KHYAD PAR DANG PO NI, SA DANG PO LA YON TAN BRGYA PHRAG BCU GNYIS DANG, GNYIS PA LA STONG PHRAG BCU GNYIS SOGS ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA LTAR YON TAN GYI GRANGS GONG NAS GONG DU ‘PHEL BA’O,,

In this regard, all the bodhisattva levels are the same; yet we do divide them out into the individual levels of Perfect Happiness & the rest, basing this division on four different criteria.  The first is that as we move up through the levels, the number of qualities which we attain increases higher and higher: as we will describe later on, we attain twelve sets of a hundred qualities each when we reach the first bodhisattva level; and then at the second another twelve sets of a thousand qualities each, and so on.


[275]
KHYAD PAR GNYIS PA NI MTHU PHUL DU BYUNG BA GONG NAS GONG DU ‘THOB PA’I KHYAD PAR RO, ,DE NI ZHING BRGYA G-YO BA DANG STONG G-YO BA SOGS LA ‘CHAD MOD KYANG, DE YON TAN GYI GRANGS ‘PHEL BA’I NANG DU SONG ZIN PAS, SA SO SO’I SKABS KYI DRI MA SBYONG BA’I STOBS DANG, LAM BGROD BA’I STOBS GONG NAS GONG DU ‘PHEL BA LA BYA DGOS PA ‘DRA’O,,

The second distinction is that as we move up through the levels we attain extraordinary power, and this increases at each level.  Now this difference has been explained by some as referring to the fact that first we are able to shake a hundred enlightened realms; and then a thousand, and so on.  But this progression has already been covered where we spoke about how the number of good qualities increases.  As such, it would seem to me that what is mentioned here must refer to the steady increase in the capacity that we gain to clean ourselves of impurities, and to travel the path.


[276]
GSUM PA NI, SA DANG POR SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN LHAG PA DANG, GNYIS PAR TSUL KHRIMS KYI PHAR PHYIN LHAG PA SOGS PHAR PHYIN LHAG PA’I KHYAD PAR RO,,

The third distinction relates to which of the perfections we take to a higher degree of practice at the particular bodhisattva level: at the first level we attain a higher practice of the perfection of giving; at the second, a higher practice of the perfection of an ethical life, and so on.


[277]
KHYAD PAR BZHI PA NI, SA DANG POR ‘DZAM BU GLING LA DBANG BA DANG, GNYIS PAR GLING BZHI LA DBANG BA’I RGYAL POR SKYE BA SOGS RNAM SMIN GYI SKYE BA GONG NAS GONG DU ‘PHEL BA’O,,

The fourth distinction relates to the rebirth that comes to us as a karmic ripening.  At the first level, this ripening produces a life where we become a king or queen with authority over our own continent of Jambu; at the second, one where we have authority over all four continents, and so on.


[278]
DES NA SA SO SO’I MI RTOG YE SHES LA YON TAN GYI GRANGS LA SOGS PA’I NUS PA DMAN MCHOG GI KHYAD PAR CHEN PO YOD PAS SA RNAMS SO SOR ‘JOG LA, SA SO SO’I SKABS KYI RJES THOB KYI YON [f. 23b] TAN RNAMS KYANG SA DE DANG DER BSDU DGOS PAS, MNYAM GZHAG KHO NA LA MI BYA’O,,

Therefore, there is a great difference in the relative power—reflected in features such as the number of high qualities involved—for the non-conceptual wisdom which is found at each of the individual bodhisattva levels; and this is why we divide out the different levels.  These differences do not apply only to the periods at each level spent in deep meditation, because the high qualities which relate to the “aftermath” periods of each level must also of necessity be included into that particular level.


[279]
SA SO SOR ‘BYED TSUL DE LTAR BYA’I, DON DAM PA’I SA ‘DI RNAMS LA RANG GI NGO BO’I DMIGS RNAM MI ‘DRA BA’I KHYAD PAR GYIS BYAS PA’I DBYE BA NI YOD PA MIN TE,

This then is how the individual bodhisattva levels are divided out; it is not though the case that these ultimate levels are somehow divided out based on some difference in the essential object perceived by each one.


[280]
SA BCU PA’I MDO LAS,
,JI LTAR BAR SNANG BYA RJES MKHAS RNAMS KYIS,
,BRJOD PAR NUS MA YIN ZHING MI MTHONG BA,
,DE LTAR RGYAL BA’I SRAS KYI SA KUN YANG,
,BRJOD MI NUS NA MNYAN PAR GA LA NUS,

As the Sutra on the Ten Levels puts it,

The trail left by a bird
Across the expanse of the sky
Is not something that the wise
Can describe, nor even see.

If all the different levels
Of the children of the Victors
Are beyond all being described,
How then could one hear of them?


[281]
ZHES BAR SNANG GI NAM MKHA’ LA BYAS BGROD KYANG, BYA’I RJES ‘JIG RTEN GYI MKHAS PA RNAMS KYIS NGAG GIS BRJOD PA DANG, BLOS MTHONG BA MIN PA BZHIN DU

Here’s what these lines are describing.  A bird may fly across the expanse of sky above; but the trail left by the bird is not something that those who are wise (in a worldly way) could ever describe in words, nor see with their mind.


[282]
BYA LTA BU’I DON DAM PA’I SA RNAMS KYIS, ,NAM MKHA’ LTA BU’I CHOS NYID LA BGROD KYANG, DE’I BGROD TSUL ‘PHAGS PAS NYAMS SU MYONG BA JI BZHIN PA NI, ‘CHAD PA PO ‘PHAGS PAS KYANG BRJOD PAR MI NUS NA, NYAN PA PO RNAMS KYIS GZIGS PA JI BZHIN PA MNYAN PAR MI NUS PAR GSUNGS SO,,

The ultimate levels are similar to the bird.  They cross the expanse of the real nature of things, comparable to the sky—and yet even if the one trying to describe it is a realized being themselves, they could never describe how the crossing is accomplished, in just the same way as this is experienced by the realized being.  How then could those listening to this person ever be able to hear what they are saying, in just the same way that they saw it?



A brief presentation of Perfect Happiness

[283]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, RAB DGA’ SOGS SA LNGA BSHAD PA DANG, SA DRUG PA MNGON DU GYUR PA BSHAD PA DANG, RING DU SONG BA SOGS SA BZHI BSHAD PA’O,,
	
This brings us to our second step from above: a separate presentation for each one of the ten levels.  Here we proceed in three sections: an explanation of the five levels beginning with Perfect Happiness; an explanation of the sixth level—Direct Perception; and then an explanation of the four levels starting with Gone Far.


[284]
DANG PO LA LNGA, SA DANG PO RAB TU DGA’ BA DANG, SA GNYIS PA DRI MA MED PA DANG, SA GSUM PA ‘OD BYED PA DANG, SA BZHI PA ‘OD ‘PHRO BA DANG, SA LNGA PA SBYANG DKA’ BA BSHAD PA’O,,

The first of these three sections we will cover in five further divisions, which are explanations of the first bodhisattva level, Perfect Happiness; the second level, Immaculate; the third level, Shining; the fourth level, Radiance; and the fifth level, Invincible.


[285]
DANG PO LA GSUM, KHYAD GZHI SA’I NGO BO MDOR BSTAN, KHYAD CHOS SA’I YON TAN RGYAS PAR BSHAD [f. 24a], SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS MJUG BSDU BA’O,,

And the first of these has three parts of its own: a brief presentation of what it is which possesses a certain feature—that is, the level itself; an expanded explanation of the feature which the level possesses—that is, specific high personal qualities; and then finally a concluding summary, accomplished through describing the high qualities of the level themselves.


[286]
DANG PO NI, SA DANG PO LA GNAS PA’I RGYAL BA’I SRAS PO SNGAR BSHAD PA’I TSUL GYIS, ‘GRO BA RANG BZHIN MED PAR MTHONG BA’I RANG BZHIN MED PA SNYING RJE’I DMIGS YUL GYI KHYAD PAR DU BZUNG BA

Here is the first.  A child of the Victors who is at the first bodhisattva level sees—in the way that we described above—how living beings have no nature of their own.  But they take this absence of any nature as a detail of how they regard the object of their compassion.


[287]
‘DI YI SEMS GANG ‘GRO BA RNAMS, RNAM PAR GROL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU SNYING RJE CHEN PO’I GZHAN DBANG DU GYUR CING,

And so their heart becomes a slave to thoughts of compassion, determined to free these beings.


[288]
BYANG SEMS KUN TU BZANG PO’I SMON LAM GYIS DGE BA RNAMS RAB TU BSNGOS PA,

And they dedicate all the good that they do with the prayer of the bodhisattva named Perfect Goodness.


[289]
RAB TU DGA’ BA ZHES PA’I MING CAN GNYIS SU SNANG BA MED PA’I YE SHES,

They possess a kind of wisdom free of any appearance of duality—a wisdom which is given the name of Perfect Happiness.


[290]
DE’I ‘BRAS BU YON TAN GYI GRANGS LA SOGS PAS NYE BAR MTSON PA LA, RAB TU GNAS PA’I BYANG SEMS KYI DON DAM PA’I SEMS DE NI ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I SEMS DANG PO ZHES BYA’O,,

And as a result of these practices, these bodhisattvas live perfectly, in a place which is represented by details such as the number of high qualities attained.  The ultimate state of mind which they possess then is referred to as “the first state of mind that has gone beyond the world.”


[291]
DE LA SA BCU PA’I MDO LAS GSUNGS PA’I SMON LAM CHEN PO BCU LA SOGS PA, SMON LAM ‘BUM PHRAG GRANGS MED PA BCU SA DANG PO BAS ‘DEBS PA NI, KUN TU BZANG PO’I SMON LAM GYI NANG DU ‘DUS PAS, SMON LAM MA LUS PA BSDU BA’I PHYIR DU RTZA BAR KUN TU BZANG PO’I SMON LAM BKOD DE, BZANG PO SPYOD PA’I SMON LAM MO,,

Now the bodhisattva at the first level makes ten billion billion billion billion billion billion million groups of a hundred thousand prayers—the “ten great prayers” and so on described in the Sutra on the Ten Levels.  These are all included within the Prayer of Perfect Goodness, and so—because it does subsume each & every prayer—it is this Prayer of Perfect Goodness, the Prayer of Deeds of Goodness, which is recorded in the root text.


[292]
DE’I NANG NAS KYANG ‘JAM DPAL DPA’ BO ZHES PA’I TSIGS BCAD GNYIS NI, BSNGO BA BLA NA MED PAR BSLAB BTUS LAS GSUNGS SO,,

Within the entire prayer, by the way, it is the two verses with the part about “Gentle Voice, the Warrior” which is said in The Compendium of All the Trainings to be an unsurpassed form of the dedication of good deeds.


[293]
‘GREL PAR NYAN THOS SBYOR LAM PA ‘BRAS BU DANG PO LA ZHUGS PAR MI ‘DOD PA BZHIN DU, SA DANG POR [f. 24b] DE MA THAG TU ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR BA’I BYANG SEMS KYI MOS PAS SPYOD PA CHEN PO’I YANG CHEN PO NI, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS MA BSKYED PA’I SA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA NI DON DAM PA’I SEMS MA BSKYED PA YIN GYI, SPYIR NA DE LAS DMA’ BA NAS KYANG BLA MED BYANG CHUB TU SEMS BSKYED PA DANG, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ YOD PAR LUGS ‘DIS KYANG BZHED PA NI, SNGAR BSHAD ZIN LA,

The commentary—in the same way that it expresses the position that listeners on the path of preparation cannot have entered into the first of the fruits—speaks of how the greater form within the greater one of the levels where the bodhisattva is acting out of aspiration (from which the first bodhisattva level is in fact about to come) is not a level where one has given rise to the Wish for enlightenment.  What this is saying though is that this is not a level where one has given rise to the ultimate form of the Wish; more generally speaking, one can already have given rise to the Wish for matchless enlightenment at an even lower level, and there are bodhisattvas at such levels.  We have already explained how this position is accepted here in the system of the current text as well.


[294]
BSLAB BTUS LAS KYANG, SO SO SKYE BO LA BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS BSKYED PA YOD PAR MDO MANG POS BSGRUBS PAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ BTAGS PA BAR ‘DOD PA NI LOG PAR ‘CHAD PA’O,,

The Compendium of All the Trainings also uses many references from sutra to establish that common beings can also possess the Wish for enlightenment; as such, it is an error to think that such practitioners are only “nominal” bodhisattvas.


[295]
NYAN THOS KYI SBYOR LAM STAN GCIG PA NAS BZUNG STE, ‘BRAS BU DANG PO MA THOB PA’I BAR RNAMS RGYUN ZHUGS ZHUGS PAR MNGON PA KUN LAS BTUS LAS BSHAD PAS ,DPE MA GRUB BO SNYAM NA,

One might raise the following objection:

The Compendium of All the Teachings on Higher Knowledge describes listeners on the path of preparation who pass up to the achievement of the first of the fruits in a single sitting as practitioners who are at the “entrance” stage of entering the stream; as such, your example is disproved.


[296]
RGYUN ZHUGS ZHUGS PA ‘PHAGS LAM THOB PA NYID LA ‘JOG PAR MNGON PA MDZOD LAS BSHAD LA, KUN LAS BTUS LAS SNGA MA LTAR YANG BSHAD PAS, LUGS MI MTHUN PA GNYIS BYUNG BA LA SLOB DPON ‘DI MNGON PA MDZOD LTAR BZHED DO,,

The Treasure House of Higher Knowledge states that attaining the path of a realized being is precisely what the “entrance” stage of entering the stream is; whereas the Compendium also gives the explanation just described.  As such, there came to be two incompatible systems on this question—but the master here accepts the position of the Treasure House.


[297]
‘DI NI MDO KUN LAS BTUS LAS, DAD PA’I RJES SU ‘BRANG BA ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS THAMS CAD KYI RDUL PHRA RAB KYI RDUL SNYED LA, BSKAL PA GANG+G’A’I KLUNG GI BYE MA SNYED DU, NYI MA RE RE ZHING LHA’I ZAS RO BRGYA PA DANG, LHA’I GOS BYIN PA BAS,

This position in fact accords with that found in the Compendium of All the Sutras, where it speaks of a practitioner who is following after faith, and who—every single day, for the length of eons equal in number to the drops of water found in the Ganges River—presents living beings, equal themselves in number to the particles of dust that compose every planet that exists, with delectable feasts of the gods, and silk of the gods.


[298]
GZHAN ZHIG GIS CHOS KYI RJES ‘BRANG GCIG LA, NYIN GCIG ZAN GCIG [f. 25a] BYIN NA SNGA MA BAS BSOD NAMS CHES GRANGS MED PA BSKYED PA DANG,

And then this text speaks of “another practitioner” (referring to one who is following after the teachings) and states that—if they present a single article of food on only a single day—they create good karma which is infinitely greater than that of the follower after faith just mentioned.


[299]
YANG CHOS KYI RJES ‘BRANG SNGA MA LTA BU’I GRANGS LA, SNGA MA LTAR SBYIN PA BYIN PA BAS, BRGYAD PA’I GANG ZAG GCIG LA NYIN GCIG ZAN GCIG BYIN NA, SNGA MA BAS BSOD NAMS CHES GRANGS MED PA BSKYED PAR GSUNGS PA DANG MTHUN PA YIN TE, RJES ‘BRANG GNYIS NI TSOGS SBYOR GYI SKABS YIN PAR GSAL BA’I PHYIR RO,,

And then it speaks of making the presentation mentioned to followers after the teachings who are equal in number to the living beings mentioned; and says that if we present a single article of food to a single person of the eighth, we again create good karma which is infinitely greater than in the former case.  The description relates here because the two mentions of “followers” are clearly a reference to the points at which one is on the path of accumulation or of preparation.



The high qualities where our being is made beautiful

[300]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, RANG GI RGYUD MDZES PAR BYED PA’I YON TAN, GZHAN GYI RGYUD ZIL GYIS GNON PA’I YON TAN, SA DANG POR LHAG PA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA’O,,

Here next we cover the second part from above—an expanded explanation of the feature which the level possesses—that is, specific high personal qualities.  We proceed in three sections: a description of the high qualities where our being is made beautiful; of the high quality where our being outshines those of others; and of the high quality where we bring our practice to a higher level.


[301]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, YON TAN SO SOR PHYE STE BSHAD PA DANG, YON TAN MDOR BSDUS TE BSTAN PA’O,,

The first of these has two steps of its own: an explanation of these high qualities, made by separating them out individually; and then an explanation of the qualities by summarizing them.


[302]
DANG PO LA GSUM, DON LDAN GYI MTSAN ‘THOB PA’I YON TAN, RIGS SU SKYE BA SOGS BZHI’I YON TAN, SA GONG MA GNON PA SOGS GSUM GYI YON TAN NO,,

The first of these, in turn, includes three points: the high quality where we earn a very significant name; the high quality with the four characteristics that begin with taking birth into a royal family; and lastly the high quality with three characteristics, beginning with surpassing the levels before.



The name we earn


	[303]
[I.5b]
,DE NAS BZUNG STE DE NI THOB PAR GYUR PA YIS,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ ZHES BYA’I SGRA NYID
KYIS BSNYAD DO,

Starting from this point,
They have attained it;
As such, they are referred to
With nothing less
Than the name of “bodhisattva.”


[304]
DANG PO NI, SA DANG PO LA ZHUGS PA DE NAS BZUNG STE BYANG SEMS DE NI DON DAM PA’I SEMS DE THOB PAR GYUR PA YIS, ,SO SKYE’I SA LAS ‘DAS PA’I SKABS SU DON DAM PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ ZHES BYA BA’I SGRA NYID KYIS BSNYAD PAR BYA BA YIN GYI, DE DANG MI MTHUN PA’I RNAM PA GZHAN GYIS BRJOD PAR MI BYA STE, DE’I TSE DE BYANG SEMS ‘PHAGS PA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here is the first.  Starting from the point that a person enters the first level, the bodhisattva has attained the ultimate form of mind.  As such, this is a stage where they have gone beyond the levels of common beings; and they are referred to with nothing less than the name of “an ultimate bodhisattva.”  It would not though be appropriate to describe them in some other way—in a way that didn’t fit this name.  And that’s because, at this point, they are a bodhisattva who is a realized being.


[305]
‘GREL PAR DKON MCHOG SPRIN DRANGS PA LAS, SBYOR LAM CHOS MCHOG CHEN PO PA LA, DON DAM [f. 25b] PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SA NI MA THOB PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS, BYANG SEMS KHYAD PAR BA’I MING GIS BSNYAD PAR SHES SO,,

The commentary at this point quotes The Cloud of the Jewels as stating that—at the greater portion of the stage called “The Ultimate Experience,” within the path of preparation—one has not yet achieved the level of an ultimate bodhisattva.  From this we understand that the practitioner by the first level is to be referred to with a term signifying that they are an exceptional bodhisattva.


[306]
SHER PHYIN NYIS STONG LNGA BRGYA PA LAS, JI LTAR SHES SHE NA, MA BYUNG BA DANG YANG DAG PAR MA BYUNG BA DANG, LOG PA DANG, DE DAG JI LTAR BYIS PA SO SO’I SKYE BOS BTAGS PA MA YIN PA DANG, JI LTAR BYIS PA SO SO SKYE BOS RNYED PA DE LTAR MA YIN PAR TE, DE’I PHYIR BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ ZHES BYA’O,

The Perfection of Wisdom in 2500 Lines includes a section that says,

How then are we to understand this?  The very reason that we call someone a “bodhisattva” is because they never started; they never started at all; they are the total opposite; they are nothing that the infants, the normal beings, think they are; they are nothing at all like the way that these beings, these infants, find them to be.


[307]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I SHUGS KYIS CHOS ‘DI DAG GI DE KHO NA NYID ‘PHAGS PAS RNYED PA JI BZHIN PA DE LTAR RNYED PA CIG ,BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAR GSUNGS PA YANG DON DAM PA’I BYANG SEMS LA DGONGS KYI, SO SKYE LA BYANG SEMS MTSAN NYID PA MED PAR STON PA MIN NO,,

What these lines are in effect referring to is a case where they could ever find the meaning of suchness in the way that these types of suchness are found by realized beings.  Speaking of those kinds of people as “bodhisattvas” here is meant in the sense of “ultimate bodhisattvas”; it is not meant to indicate that a common being could never be a real bodhisattva.



You belong now to a royal family,
and you are free of the three bonds

	[308]
[I.6]
Jātaḥ kule bhavati caiṣa Tathāgatānāṃ
saṃyojana trayam api kṣatamasya sarvam,
Modaṃ bibharti ca paraṃ sa hi bodhisattva
āloka dhatu śata kampana jāta śaktiḥ.

[I.6a]
,’DI NI DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS KYI RIGS SU’ANG
SKYES PA STE,
,’DI NI KUN TU SBYOR BA GSUM PO THAMS CAD
SPANGS PA YIN,

They have also taken their birth
Into the family of Those Gone Thus,
And they have eliminated, within themselves,
All three of the bonds.


[309]
GNYIS PA NI, GZHAN YANG SA DANG PO LA GNAS PA ‘DI NI SO SKYE DANG NYAN RANG GI SA THAMS CAD LAS ‘DAS PA’I PHYIR DANG, SANGS RGYAS KYI SA’I RJES SU ‘GRO BAR NGES PA’I LAM RGYUD LA SKYES PA’I PHYIR DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS KYI RIGS SU’ANG SKYES PA STE, LAM GZHAN DU MI ‘GRO BAR RANG GI LAM DU RIGS NGES PA YIN NO,,

This brings us to our second point from above: the high quality with the four characteristics which begin with taking birth into a royal family.  We can moreover add that this person who is at the first bodhisattva level has taken birth into the family of Those Gone Thus—because they have gone far beyond the levels of common beings, and both the listeners & self made buddhas; and moreover because they have now given rise, within their hearts, to a path which is definite to lead them to the level of a Buddha.  That is, they are confirmed within the family of their own path, and will never go off to some different path.


[310]
SA DANG PO ‘DI NI GANG ZAG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BAS, ‘JIG LTA DANG PHRA RGYAS KYI THE TSOM DANG, TSUL KHRIMS DANG BRTUL ZHUGS MCHOG ‘DZIN GYI KUN TU SBYOR BA GSUM PO THAMS CAD SPANGS PA YIN TE, SLAR MI SKYE BA’I PHYIR RO,,

This practitioner at the first bodhisattva level has seen, directly, the lack of a self-nature to the person: the fact that the person possesses no nature of existing by definition.  They have thus eliminated, within themselves, all three of what we call the “bonds”: the view of destruction; forms of doubt which are infectious negative thoughts; and the belief that mistaken forms of morality & asceticism are perfect.  They have “eliminated” the three because these will never again make their appearance within the bodhisattva.


[311]
DES NI DE GSUM GYI SA BON SPANGS PAR [f. 26a] BSTAN LA, ‘JIG LTA NI MTHONG SPANG DU GYUR PA KUN BRTAGS YIN GYI LHAN SKYES MIN NO,,

This by the way is to indicate that the seeds of these three have been eliminated.  In the case of the view of destruction, however, the form which is eliminated at the path of seeing is the learned one, and not the inborn one.


[312]
‘O NA PHRA RGYAS KYI MTHONG SPANG GZHAN YANG SPANGS PA LA, GSUM PO ‘DI TZAM SMOS PA CI YIN SNYAM NA, MDO SDE LAS ‘DI LTAR GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS PA ‘CHAD PA LA LUGS GNYIS YOD KYANG,

One may wonder why—since there are other infectious negative thoughts also eliminated when we reach the path of seeing—only these three are mentioned.  There are two different systems of explaining what the sutras had in mind when they described it this way.


[313]
LEGS PA NI MDZOD LAS,
,’GRO MI ‘DOD DANG LAM NOR DANG,
,LAM LA THE TSOM DE SNYED CIG
,THAR PAR BGROD LA GEGS BYED PA,
,DE YI PHYIR NA GSUM BSTAN NO,
ZHES BSHAD PA LTAR RO,,

The system which is best is expressed in the Treasure House of Wisdom, where it says:

The number given is three,
Since they correspond 

To not wanting to go;
To choosing a wrong path;
And to doubt about the path—

The number that create an obstacle
To our journey to liberation.


[314]
DPER NA YUL GZHAN DU ‘GRO ‘DOD PA LA BAR CHAD KYI GTZO BO GSUM STE, ‘GRO MI ‘DOD PA DANG, LAM NOR BA DANG, LAM LA THE TSOM ZA BA’O,,

If for example we wish to travel to some other land, then there are three main obstacles that can prevent us: not wanting to go; choosing the wrong road; and not being sure which road to take.


[315]
DE BZHIN DU THAR PAR BGROD PA LA YANG BAR CHAD KYI GTZO BO GSUM STE, DANG POS NI THAR PA LA SKRAG PAS DER ‘GRO MI ‘DOD PA DANG, GSUM PAS NI LAM GZHAN LA BRTEN PAS LAM NOR BA DANG, GNYIS PAS NI LAM LA THE TSOM ZA BAS GSUM BSTAN NO,,

Just so, there are three primary obstacles to our journey to liberation.  The first of these causes us to have same fear about being liberated—and so this one is like not wanting to go.  The third one causes us to attempt to follow some other path; and that is similar to taking a wrong road.  And the second consists of having doubts about the path; thus it is that three are indicated.


[316]
BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ SA DANG PO BA DE NI SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR RIGS NGES PA LA ZHUGS PAS, DE’I ‘BRAS BU’I YON TAN THOB PA DANG, SA’I SPANG BYA’I SKYON DANG BRAL BAS

This bodhisattva on the first level, as we have already mentioned, has reached a point of certainty about the family to which they belong.  They have thus attained the high spiritual quality which is the result of belonging to this family, and are free of the defects which are eliminated at this particular level.



Happiness supreme

	[317]
	[I.6b]
,BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ DE NI DGA’ BA 
MCHOG TU GYUR ‘CHANG ZHING,
,’JIG RTEN KHAMS BRGYA KUN NAS G-YO BAR
NUS PAR GYUR PA’ANG YIN,

This bodhisattva holds in their hands
A supreme form of happiness;
And they are further someone
Who can shake a hundred planets.
	


[318]
THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I DGA’ BA SKYES PAS, RAB TU DGA’ BA MANG BA’I PHYIR, RGYAL SRAS DE DGA’ BA MCHOG TU GYUR PA ‘CHANG BA YANG YIN NO, ,RAB DGA’ KHYAD PAR DU ‘PHAGS PA YOD PA’I PHYIR SA ‘DI LA RAB TU DGA’ BA ZHES KYANG BYA’O,,

As such, they come to feel a truly unique form of happiness; and are thus filled with many different kinds of perfect happiness.  Because of this we can also say, “This level is named Perfect Happiness, since the son or daughter of the Victors holds in their hands a supreme form of happiness, and their perfect happiness itself is one which is truly superior.”


[319]
‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS [f. 26b] MI GCIG PA BRGYA KUN NAS G-YO BAR NUS PAR GYUR PA’ANG YIN NO,,

And they are further someone who has the power to shake not just a single planet, but no less than a hundred.



Working our way up

	[320]
[I.7]
Ūrdhvaṃ prayāti ca bhuvo bhuvam ādadāno
ruddho’sya durgati pathaḥ sakala stadānīm,
Kṣīṇāḥ pṛthagjana bhuvaś ca tadāsya sarvā
āryo yathāṣṭamaka eṣa tathopadiṣṭaḥ.

,SA NAS SAR GNON BYED CING GONG MAR RAB TU
‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR,
,DE TSE ‘DI YI NGAN ‘GRO’I LAM RNAMS MTHA’ DAG
‘GAG PAR ‘GYUR,
,DE TSE ‘DI YI SO SO SKYE BO’I SA RNAMS
THAMS CAD ZAD,
,’DI NI ‘PHAGS PA BRGYAD PA JI LTA DE LTAR
NYE BAR BSTAN,

They want to work their way up
From the one level to the next;
They begin to move up;

And when it happens
They block all the paths
To the realms of misery.

At this point as well
All the levels for them
Relating to normal beings
Are finished.

	They are spoken of this way
As a realized being of the eight.


[321]
GSUM PA NI, SA DANG PO NAS SA GNYIS PAR GNON PAR BYED PA LA SPRO BA SHIN TU CHE ZHING, SA GONG MAR RAB TU ‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR RO, ,SA DANG PO THOB PA DE’I TSE BYANG SEMS ‘DI YI NGAN ‘GROR ‘GRO BA’I LAM RNAMS MTHA’ DAG ‘GAG PA STE ZAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

With this we come to our third point from above, which is a description of the high quality with three characteristics, beginning with surpassing the levels before.  They start to feel an intense joy about working their way up to the second level from the first.  And then they actually begin to move up through the levels.  And when they reach the first level, the bodhisattva is able to block—that is, to stop—all the paths that would lead them to a birth in the realms of misery.


[322]
‘O NA SBYOR LAM BZOD PA THOB NAS NGAN SONG DU LAS DBANG GIS ‘GRO MI SRID PA MA YIN NAM, NGAN ‘GRO’I LAM ZAD PA SA ‘DI THOB PA LA LTOS CI DGOS SNYAM NA,

“Isn’t it the case though,” one may wonder, “that it is impossible—once one has reached the level called “mastery” within the path of preparation—for that person to go the lower realms through the power of karma?  Why then have you said here that one must rely upon this particular bodhisattva level, in order to ‘block the paths to the realms of misery’?”


[323]
BZOD PA THOB NAS NGAN ‘GROR ‘GRO MI SRID PA NI, DER ‘KHRID PA’I SA BON GNYEN POS BCOM PA MIN GYI, RKYEN MA TSANG BAS YIN CING, ‘DIR NI SA BON GNYEN POS BCOM PA YIN LA, KUN LAS BTUS LAS KYANG NGAN ‘GRO’I PHUNG KHAMS SOGS MTHONG SPANG DU BSHAD DO,,

The fact that it is impossible to go to the realms of misery once one has attained the level of mastery is not due to one’s having destroyed the seed that can pull one there, by using a spiritual antidote, at that particular stage.  Rather, it is because the conditions that would make this happen are simply incomplete.  Here at this bodhisattva level though, the seed is destroyed, with a spiritual antidote; and The Compendium states as well that things like the heaps & categories of a being in the realms of misery are something which is eliminated by the path of seeing.


[324]
SA DANG PO THOB PA DE’I TSE BYANG SEMS ‘DI YI SO SO SKYE BO’I SA STE GNAS SKABS THAMS CAD ZAD DO,,

At this point as well—that is, when one reaches the first level—all the levels or periods for this bodhisattva which relate to normal beings are finished.



A realized being of the eighth rank

[325]
GNYIS PA NI, MDOR NA JI LTAR ‘BRAS GNAS BZHI DANG ‘BRAS BU LA ZHUGS PA BZHI’I DGRA BCOM NAS YAS BGRANGS NA, GRANGS BRGYAD PA YIN PAS ‘PHAGS PA BRGYAD PA RGYUN ZHUGS ZHUGS PA LA,

This brings us to the second step in our description of the high qualities where our being is made beautiful.  This is an explanation of those qualities made by summarizing them.  And so in brief we can think of the steps leading up to an enemy destroyer: where they have gone through the four stages of residing at the level of the result, and the four stages of entering the level of the result.  Counting downwards from here, we get eight stages, so we can refer to a someone who is just entering the state of a stream-enterer as an “eighth-rank realized being.”


[326]
‘PHAGS PA’I CHOS THOB PA LAS RANG DANG RJES SU MTHUN PA’I SPANGS PA DANG, RTOGS PA’I YON TAN ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR BA BZHIN DU, BYANG SEMS ‘DI YANG SA DANG PO THOB PA LAS SKYON ZAD PA DANG, YON TAN ‘BYUNG BA BRGYAD PA JI LTA BA DE LTAR NYE BAR BSTAN NO,,

Once we have attained the world of a realized being, a number of things happen in conjunction with this occurrence; that is, we gain specific personal qualities related to having eliminated certain negativities, and to having reached certain realizations.  In the same way, this particular bodhisattva—the one who has reached the first level—has finished off certain faults, and gained certain virtues, relating to the number eight; and is thus spoken of in this way.



Outshining others by virtue of our family

[327]
GNYIS PA LA [f. 27a] GSUM, SA ‘DIR NYAN RANG RNAMS RIGS KYI SGO NAS ZIL GYIS GNON PA DANG, SA BDUN PAR NYAN RANG GNYIS BLO’I SGO NAS ZIL GYIS GNON PA DANG, DE LTAR GSUNGS PAS GRUB PA’I DON BSHAD PA’O,,

With this we have reached the second of our more general sections above—the high quality where our being outshines those of others.  This we also cover in three steps: how a bodhisattva at this level outshines the listeners & self-made buddhas, by virtue of the family to which they belong; how, at the seventh bodhisattva level, they outshine these two by virtue of their state of mind; and then an explanation of the conclusion we can draw from statements to this effect.


	[328]
[I.8]
Pratyekabuddhān sa Munīndra ghoṣajān
puṇyādhipatyena jayan vivardhate,
Sambodhicitte prathame’pi hi sthitaḥ
dūraṅ gamāyāṃ tu dhiyāpi so’dhikaḥ.

[I.8a]
,RDZOGS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS LTA
 DANG PO LA GNAS KYANG,
,THUB DBANG GSUNG SKYES DANG BCAS [f. 202a] 
RANG SANGS RGYAS RNAMS NI,
,BSOD NAMS DAG GI DBANG GIS
PHAM BYAS RNAM PAR ‘PHEL,

Even those who stay at the first
Of the visions of total enlightenment

Defeat, by the force of both good karmas [f. 202a],
The self-made buddhas,

Along with those born from the words
Of the Lords of the Able Ones;

Then they continue to exceed them further.	


[329]
DANG PO NI, RDZOGS PA’I BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS LTA GNYIS PA SOGS SU MA ZAD, SEMS DANG PO RAB TU DGA’ BA LA GNAS PAS KYANG, THUB PA’I DBANG PO’I GSUNG LAS SKYES PA NYAN THOS DANG BCAS PA’I RANG SANGS RGYAS RNAMS NI, KUN RDZOB BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS DANG SNYING RJE’I BSOD NAMS DAG GI DBANG GIS PHAM PAR BYAS PA STE ZIL GYIS MNAN NAS, DE DAG LAS BSOD NAMS RNAM PAR ‘PHEL BAR ‘GYUR TE,

Here is the first.  This thing is true not only for those who have reached levels such as the second vision of total enlightenment; that is, even those who are staying at the first state of mind—at Perfect Happiness—“defeat” (which is to say, outshine) the self-made buddhas, along with the listeners: those who have been born from the words of the Lords of the Able Ones.  And they do so by force of both the good karma of their deceptive form of the Wish for enlightenment, and the good karma of their compassion.  They continue on then and exceed both these types of practitioners even further in this goodness.


[330]
SNGAR BSHAD PA’I YON TAN GYI KHYAD PAR RNAMS LAS, YON TAN GYI KHYAD PAR GZHAN PA CIG YIN NO,,

This is yet one more type of high good quality which they possess, in addition to those types which we have already described.


[331]
‘DI YANG BYAMS PA’I RNAM PAR THAR PA LAS, RIGS KYI BU ‘DI LTA STE DPER NA RGYAL PO’I BU SKYES NAS RING PO MA LON PA, RGYAL PO’I MTSAN DANG LDAN PA NI BLON PO’I TSOGS RGAN PO GTZO BOR GYUR PA THAMS CAD KYANG, RIGS KYI BDAG NYID CHE BA’I DBANG GIS ZIL GYIS GNON TO,,

We hear too from the Life of Loving One,

O child of noble family, this is how it is.  Imagine that the king of a land has given birth to a son or daughter.  Within a short time after their birth, this child—the one who bears the name of “the king”—already outshines even all of those who are the most senior and foremost among the ministers of state, by force of the greatness of their family line.


[332]
DE BZHIN DU BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LAS DANG PO PA BYANG CHUB TU SEMS BSKYED NAS RING PO MA LON PA, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA CHOS KYI RGYAL PO’I RIGS SU SKYES PAS KYANG, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS DANG SNYING RJE’I DBANG GIS NYAN THOS DANG, RANG SANGS RGYAS YUN RING DU TSANGS PAR SPYAD PA RNAMS ZIL [f. 27b] GYIS GNON TO,,

A beginner bodhisattva is just the same: not long after they have reached the wish for enlightenment, and taken their birth into the family of the Kings of the Dharma—Those Who Have Gone That Way—then by force of their wish for enlightenment and their compassion, they already outshine the listeners & the self-made buddhas, who have led a life of purity over a very long period of time.


[333]
RIGS KYI BU ‘DI LTA STE, DPER NA NAM MKHA’ LDING GI DBANG PO CHEN PO’I PHRUG GU SKYES NAS RING PO MA LON PA’I GSHOG PA’I RLUNG GI SHUGS DANG, MIG YONGS SU DAG PA’I YON TAN GANG YIN PA DE NI, DE LAS GZHAN PA’I BYA’I TSOGS MA LUS PA RGAS PAR GYUR PA THAMS CAD LA YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

It is like, o child of noble family, the case with the Lords of the Skygliders, once they have given birth to a chick.  Within a short period of time, the baby’s wings possess a power of thrust, and their eyes possess a quality of sharpness—things that the great mass of other types of birds, even though they may have lived much longer, simply lack.


[334]
DE BZHIN DU BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ BYANG CHUB TU SEMS DANG PO BSKYED PA, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA NAM MKHA’ LDING GI DBANG PO CHEN PO’I RIGS KYI RGYUD DU YANG DAG PAR BYUNG BA,

Bodhisattvas who have just given birth for the first time to the wish for enlightenment are the same.  They have now stepped into the family line of the great Lords among Skygliders: Those Who Have Gone That Way.


[335]
NAM MKHA’ LDING GI DBANG PO’I PHRUG GU THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA NYID DU SEMS BSKYED PA’I GSHOG PA’I STOBS KYIS PHA ROL GNON PA DANG, 

These chicks of the Lords of the Skygliders outshine others in the power of their wings—in the wish they have developed for a single goal: the state of omniscience.


[336]
LHAG PA’I BSAM PA YONGS SU DAG PA’I MIG GI YON TAN GANG YIN PA DE NI, BSKAL PA BRGYA STONG DU NGES PAR BYUNG BA’I NYAN THOS DANG, RANG SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD LA YOD PA MA YIN NO ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA GSUNGS PA BZHIN NO,,

The quality of the sharpness of their eyes—that is, their sense of personal responsibility for others—is as well something that is simply lacking among any one of the listeners or self-made buddhas, even though they may have reached their state hundreds, or even thousands, of eons before.


[337]
‘GREL BSHAD LAS LUNG DE GNYIS KYI DON BRDA LAS BYUNG BA’I SEMS BSKYED LA ‘CHAD MOD KYANG, LAS DANG PO PA DANG, SEMS BSKYED NAS RING DU MA LON PA ZHES GSUNGS PA NI, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED LA BLTOS NAS YIN LA,

Admittedly, the Explanation describes these two citations as referring to the Wish for enlightenment which comes from terms; but the mentions of “a beginner” and “not long after they have reached the wish for enlightenment” are made relative to the ultimate form of this Wish.


[338]
SNGAR DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I RIGS SU SKYES PA SA DANG PO NAS YIN PAR GSUNGS PA DANG, LUNG SNGA PHYI GNYIS KA NI DPE SO SO BA TZAM MA GTOGS PA DON GCIG YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, RTZA BA’I TSIG RKANG GSUM GYI DON YANG [f. 28a] MDO DE’I DON BSDUS PAR SNANG BA’I PHYIR DANG,

This is the true because of the statement, earlier on, that ones birth into the family of Those Gone Thus begins from the first bodhisattva level; and because the meaning of the two metaphors—in the first and then the second citations—is the same, only that these metaphors are presented separately. Also, it would appear that the point of the three lines of the [Tibetan translation of the] root text at this point [seven lines in the English translation] is to summarize the meaning of this particular sutra.


[339]
LHAG PA’I BSAM PA DAG PA’I SEMS BSKYED NI SA DANG PO’I SEMS BSKYED LA MDO SDE RGYAN LA SOGS PA MANG PO LAS GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Finally, it is stated in many sources—such as The Jewel of the Sutras—that the Wish for enlightenment in the form of taking personal responsibility for all beings is the type of Wish for enlightenment at the first bodhisattva level.


[340]
‘O NA BYANG SEMS SO SKYE’I KUN RDZOB SEMS BSKYED KYIS, NYAN RANG ZIL GYIS GNON PAR MI ‘DOD DAM SNYAM NA,

You might think to yourself, “But are you saying then that you don’t believe that the deceptive Wish for enlightenment possessed by a bodhisattva who is a normal being outshines listeners & self-made buddhas?”


[341]
DE NI MA YIN TE MDO DE NYID LAS, RIGS KYI BU ‘DI LTA STE DPER NA RDO RJE RIN PO CHE NI CHAG KYANG GSER GYI RGYAN KHYAD PAR DU ‘PHAGS PA THAMS CAD ZIL GYIS GNON CING, RDO RJE RIN PO CHE’I MING YANG MI ‘DOR LA, DBUL BA THAMS CAD KYANG RNAM PAR ZLOG GO

No, we’re not.  Because the very same sutra says,

Here, o child of noble family, is how it is.  A jewel which is a diamond—even if it is broken—outshines even an extraordinarily fine ornament made of gold.  Nor, even if it is broken, does it ever lose the name of “a diamond”—and it can still alleviate every form of poverty.


[342]
,RIGS KYI BU DE BZHIN DU THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAR SEMS BSKYED PA’I RDO RJE RIN PO CHE NAN TAN DANG BRAL YANG, NYAN THOS DANG RANG SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN GYI GSER GYI RGYAN THAMS CAD ZIL GYIS GNON CING, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I MING YANG MI ‘DOR LA ‘KHOR BA’I DBUL BA THAMS CAD KYANG RNAM PAR ZLOG GO ,ZHES GSUNGS LA

O child of noble family, it is the same with the jewel of the diamond where one has reached the Wish for the state of omniscience, even if she or he lacks any special effort in this thinking.  It still outshines all the golden ornaments of the good qualities of listeners & self-made buddhas; one still never loses the name of “a bodhisattva”; and it still alleviates every form of the poverty of the cycle of pain.


[343]
MDO ‘DI BSLAB BTUS LAS, BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS SPYOD PA DANG BRAL BA LA YANG BRNYAS PAR MI BYA BA’I SHES BYED DU DRANGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, SA THOB PA LA SEMS BSKYED SPYOD PA DANG BRAL BA NI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is further the case that The Compendium quotes—as support for the idea that one should never disparage even a form of the Wish for enlightenment where the person who possesses it has yet to act upon it—this same sutra.  And finally it is possible for a person who has reached the bodhisattva levels to have the Wish for enlightenment and not be acting upon it.



Outshining others by virtue of our state of mind

	[344]
[I.8b]
,DE NI RING DU SONG BAR BLO YANG LHAG PAR ‘GYUR,

This same one will also exceed them
In their state of mind,
At the level called “Gone Far.”


[345]
GNYIS PA NI, BYANG SEMS SA DANG PO BA DE NI, SA RING DU SONG BAR SON PA NA, KUN RDZOB BYANG CHUB KYI SEMS KYIS ZIL GYIS GNON PAR MA ZAD, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED KYI BLO YI STOBS KYIS KYANG, NYAN RANG RNAMS [f. 28b] LHAG PAR TE ZIL GYIS GNON PAR ‘GYUR TE,

Which brings us to the second step from above: how—at the seventh level—a bodhisattva outshines these two by virtue of their state of mind.  Once this same bodhisattva at the first level reaches the level called “Gone Far,” it’s not only the case that they outshine listeners & self-made buddhas by virtue of the deceptive Wish for enlightenment which they possess; that is, they will also exceed them—outshine them—due to the power of their state of mind: the ultimate Wish for enlightenment.


[346]
‘DI NI SA BCU PA’I MDO LAS, KYE RGYAL BA’I SRAS DAG ‘DI LTA STE, DPER NA RGYAL PO’I RIGS SU SKYES PA’I RGYAL PO’I BU RGYAL PO’I MTSAN DANG LDAN PA NI, SKYES PA TZAM GYIS RGYAL PO’I BYIN GYIS BLON PO’I TSOGS THAMS CAD ZIL GYIS GNON GYI, RANG GI BLO’I STOBS KYIS RNAM PAR DPYAD PAS NI MA YIN NO,,

This recalls The Sutra on the Ten Levels, where it says:

O child of the Victors, this is the way of it.  A child of the King—one who has been born into the line of kings, and now possesses the name of the King—outshines the entire assembly of ministers, by nothing more than taking that birth: by virtue of the blessing of the King.  It is not though because they possess, at this point in their lives, high powers of discrimination: not because of their own state of mind.


[347]
NAM DE NAR SON PAR GYUR PA DE’I TSE RANG GI BLO’I STOBS BSKYED PAS, BLON PO’I BYA BA THAMS CAD LAS NI SHIN TU ‘DAS PA YIN NO,,

When though they have grown to be an adult, they have developed their full mental powers; and then they absolutely surpass the ministers, in all their deeds.


[348]
KYE RGYAL BA’I SRAS DAG DE BZHIN DU BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ YANG, SEMS BSKYED MA THAG TU LHAG PA’I BSAM PA’I CHE BA NYID KYIS, NYAN THOS DANG RANG SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD ZIL GYIS GNON GYI, RANG GI BLO’I STOBS KYIS RNAM PAR DPYAD PA NI MA YIN NO,,

It is the same, o child of the Victors, with the bodhisattvas.  In the moment after they have developed the Wish for enlightenment, they outshine all listeners & self-made buddhas—in the magnificence of their attitude of personal responsibility.  It is not however in their state of mind: in their capacity of discrimination.


[349]
BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SA BDUN PA ‘DI LA GNAS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ NI, RANG GI YUL SHES PA’I CHE BA LA GNAS PAS, NYAN THOS DANG RANG SANGS RGYAS KYI BYA BA THAMS CAD LAS SHIN TU ‘DAS PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA BZHIN NO,,

A bodhisattva residing here, at the seventh bodhisattva level, is also residing in a magnificence of how they perceive their object—and so they absolutely surpass the listeners & self-made buddhas, in all their deeds.


[350]
SEMS BSKYED MA THAG TU ZHES PA NI SA DANG PO’I SKABS YIN PAS, LHAG PA’I BSAM PA DAG PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA’O,,

The expression “in the moment after they have developed the Wish for enlightenment” applies to the point at which they are at the first bodhisattva level, and is thus a reference to the Wish for enlightenment in the form of taking personal responsibility for all beings.


[351]
DE LTAR NA SA RING DU SONG BA KHO NA NAS BZUNG NAS, BYANG SEMS KYIS RANG GI BLO’I STOBS BSKYED PAS KYANG, NYAN RANG RNAMS ZIL GYIS GNON GYI, SA DRUG PA MAN CHAD DU NI [f. 29a] BLO’I STOBS KYIS ZIL GYIS GNON PA MA YIN NO,,

Thus we can say that it is only from the point when they reach the level of “Gone Far” that the bodhisattva also outshines listeners & self-made buddhas in the powers of mind that they have developed: it is not the case that they outshine them in their state of mind at the sixth level on down.


[352]
NYAN RANG GI BYA BA THAMS CAD LAS ‘DAS PA’I DON NI, DE GNYIS BLOS ZIL GYIS GNON PA’I DON YIN PAR ‘GREL PA’I DON BSDUS LAS SHES SO,,

What does it mean when we say that the bodhisattva “surpasses all listeners & self-made buddhas in their deeds”?  We can understand, from the summation of this citation in the commentary, that it refers to how they surpass these two in their state of mind.


[353]
BLO’I STOBS ‘CHAD PA NA RANG GI YUL SHES PA’I CHE BA LA GNAS PAS, ZHES PA NI BYANG SEMS RANG GI YUL ‘GOG PA YANG DAG PA’I MTHA’ SHES PA’I CHE BA’O,,

Where the lines are clarifying what “mental powers” are and mention “a magnificence of how they perceive their object,” the reference is to the magnificence of the bodhisattva’s own object, in the sense of the end that they have put to negativities; and of their perception of the absolute end.


[354]
DON ‘DI LA KHA CIG DRUG PA MAN CHAD DANG, BDUN PA’I YE SHES KYI NGO BO LA KHYAD MED KYANG, YE SHES DANG PO RNAMS LA SHES SGRIB SPONG BA’I NUS PA MED LA, BDUN PA’I YE SHES LA SHES SGRIB SPONG BA’I NUS PA YOD PAS, BLO’I SGO NAS ZIL GYIS GNON MI GNON YOD DO, ,ZHES PA DANG,

With reference to this point, some have made the claim that—although there is no essential difference between the wisdom we possess at the sixth and lower bodhisattva levels, and that which we possess at the seventh—the first of them lacks the power to remove obstacles to omniscience; whereas the wisdom of the seventh level does possess this power.  This then, they say, is what determines whether we outshine others by virtue of our state of mind, or not.


[355]
YANG BDUN PA NAS TING NGE ‘DZIN LA THOD RGAL DU ‘JUG NUS PAS ZHES PA DANG,

Others have made the claim that the distinction is based upon the fact that—from the seventh level on—we are able to engage in what we call “alternating” meditation.


[356]
BDUN PA’I YE SHES DE PHYIR MI LDOG PA’I SA BRGYAD PA LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PA’I YE SHES SU ‘DUG PAS, BLOS ZIL GYIS GNON NO ZHES ZER RO,,

Still others have said that at the seventh level we outshine others in our state of mind because the wisdom of this level is a kind of wisdom where we are closely approaching the unstoppable state of the eighth level.


[357]
DE’I DANG PO NI MI RIGS TE LUGS ‘DIS NI, GANG ZAG BDEN ‘DZIN THAMS CAD NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PAR BZHED LA, DE SLAR MI SKYE BA’I TSUL GYIS SPONG BA LA, DE DAG GI SA BON ZAD DGOS SHING, SPANGS PA DE YANG DGRA BCOM PA GNYIS DANG THUN MONG BA YIN PAS, BDEN ‘DZIN GYI SA BON SPONG BA NI SHES SGRIB SPONG BA MIN NO,,

The first of these positions is incorrect because this particular system asserts that all forms of the tendency to believe that the person is real are a kind of misunderstanding which is involved with negative thoughts; and to eliminate these tendencies in a way which assures that they can never arise again, we must stop their seeds.  It being further the case that this kind of elimination is shared by both types of enemy destroyers, we do not eliminate obstacles to omniscience when we eliminate the seeds of our tendency to believe that something is real.


[358]
SA BON DE LAS GZHAN PA’I BAG CHAGS KYI SGRIB [f. 29b] PA SHES SGRIB TU ‘JOG PA NI, SA BRGYAD PA MA THOB BAR DU SPONG BA MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This is because we say that obstacles represented by mental potentials other than these particular seeds are obstacles to omniscience because they are not eliminated until we attain the eighth level.


[359]
DES NA LUGS ‘DI LA BDEN ‘DZIN SHES SGRIB TU ‘JOG PA’I LUGS KYIS, DE LA SHES SGRIB CHUNG ‘BRING CHEN PO DGUR BYAS NAS, SA GNYIS PA SOGS SGOM LAM DGUS SPONG BA’I RNAM GZHAG KHAS MI LEN TE, DA DUNG ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Thus it is that in this particular system we refuse to accept the presentation—found in the system where they say that the tendency to believe that things are real is an obstacle to omniscience—which says that obstacles to omniscience are to be divided into nine degrees (starting from a division into lesser, medium, and greater), and that these are eliminated by nine forms of the path of habituation at the second and other levels.  We will elucidate this further on in this work.


[360]
GNYIS PA YANG MI RIGS TE THOD RGAL ZHES PA LA NI, BRDA RNYING PA LAS SNREL ZHI ZHES KYANG ‘BYUNG BAS, RIM PA ‘CHOL BA LA ZER ZHING, ‘DIR DE’I SGO NAS TING NGE ‘DZIN LA ‘JUG PA DRUG PA MAN CHAD LA MED CING BDUN PA NAS YOD PA LA SHES BYED MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The second position is also mistaken.  The expression “alternating meditation” is also referred to with the archaism nelshi, which means “out of order.”  But there is no scriptural support for the idea that a form of meditation which engages in different meditative levels in this way—skipping through them out of order—would be absent at the sixth and lower bodhisattva levels, and then suddenly exist at the seventh.


[361]
GSUM PA YANG MI RIGS TE, DE LA NI DRUG PA MAN CHAD DANG BDUN PA LA RTOGS PAS ZIL GYIS GNON MI GNON GYI RGYU MTSAN LA, DA DUNG DOGS PA MA CHOD PAS RTZOD GZHI RTAGS SU BKOD PA DANG ‘DRA BA’I PHYIR RO,,

The third of the positions mentioned is also incorrect.  It gives—as a reason for making the distinction that at the seventh bodhisattva level we outshine the sixth and lower levels by virtue of our state of realization—something which by that point we have not yet resolved; and so it’s as if the thing we are using as our reason is the very thing we are arguing about.


[362]
‘GREL BSHAD LAS SA BDUN PAR KHO BO LAM LA ‘JUG PAR BYA’O SNYAM PA’I RNAM RTOG YOD PAS RTZOL BA DANG BCAS LA, MDO LA SOGS PA’I CHOS KYI MTSAN MA MNGON DU MI BYED PAS, MTSAN MA MED PA’I LAM THOB CING, DRUG PA MAN CHAD DANG NYAN RANG RNAMS LA MTSAN MED DE MED PAS, BLOS ZIL GYIS GNON PAR GSUNGS KYANG,

It is true that The Explanation speaks of how—at the seventh level—we still engage in discursive thought: we still say to ourselves, “I will practice the path”; and thus still exhibit conscious will.  But we do not at this point still bring up mental forms of the physical manifestations of the teachings—the books of the sutras, or anything such; and so we can say that we have reached a “path free of the signs of things.”  At the sixth and lower levels, continues this text, and with listeners & self-made buddhas, there is no “freedom from signs” of this kind.


[363]
‘DI LA DE KHO NA NYID KYI RTOGS PA’I STENG NAS KHYAD PAR GZHAG DGOS PAR SNANG NGO,,

And yet it appears to me that the distinction we are dealing with here must be drawn on the basis of how far one has realized suchness. 


[364]
DE YANG YANG DAG PA’I MTHA’I DE KHO NA NYID LA ‘JUG [f. 30a] LDANG GI SGO NAS YIN TE, SA BDUN PA’I SKABS SU ‘CHAD PA LTAR SEMS KYI SKAD CIG RE RE LA ‘GOG PA YANG DAG MTHA’ LA ‘JUG LDANG BYED PA SA ‘DI NAS NUS LA, SA ‘OG MAR MI NUS PAR GSUNGS PA YIN NO, 

In this version, the reference is to how we sink into or come out of suchness, in the form of the ultimate end.  As we will see in the section where we cover the seventh bodhisattva level, it is said that we are at this level capable of sinking in or coming out of this ultimate end, and a state of cessation, at will—in every successive instant of the flow of our mind.  We do not though possess this capacity at levels below this.


[365]
ZHES BDAG GI BLA MA DAM PA GSUNG BA LTAR LEGS TE, MOS SPYOD DU SEMS DANG DE KHO NA NYID GNYIS RO GCIG TU MA SONG BA’I STONG NYID KYI TING NGE ‘DZIN LA DUS THUNG NGUR ‘JUG LDANG BYED PA MI DKA’ YANG, 

This is how my own precious Lama has explained the point, and this is a good way to do it.  At the levels where our perception of suchness is no more than picturing how it must be, we have no great difficulty in entering & rising from—for brief periods of time—the meditative concentration on a form of emptiness where the two of our own mind and the suchness have yet to meld together into a single song.


[366]
SEMS DANG DE KHO NA NYID GNYIS CHU LA CHU BZHAG PA BZHIN DU SONG BA’I ‘PHAGS PA’I SKABS SU, ‘JUG LDANG GI TSUL DE SHIN TU DKA’ BA’I PHYIR RO,,

This particular way of entering & rising from the meditation though becomes extremely difficult at the point where we become a realized being: when the two of our mind and suchness have turned like water poured into water.


[367]
GAL TE SA DANG PO’I YON TAN GYI SKABS SU, SA BDUN PAR NYAN RANG BLOS ZIL GYIS GNON PAR ‘CHAD PA ‘DI SKABS LA MA BAB PO SNYAM NA, 

Now you might be thinking to yourself that at this particular juncture—where we are covering the high spiritual qualities of the first bodhisattva level—an explanation of how a bodhisattva at the seventh level outshines the listeners & self-made buddhas seems a little out of place.


[368]
SKABS ‘CHOL BA’I SKYON MED DE, ‘DIR SA DANG PO SOGS KYI BSHAD PA NI, MDO SDE SA BCU PA LA BRTEN NAS ‘CHAD LA, MDO DER SA DANG PO LA GNAS PAS NYAN RANG RNAMS KUN RDZOB SEMS BSKYED KYIS ZIL GYIS GNON PA DANG, DON DAM SEMS BSKYED KYI SGO NAS ZIL GYIS MI GNON PA’I KHYAD PAR LEGS PAR PHYE NAS GSUNGS LA,

And yet there is no such concern, that the order of our presentation might be mixed up.  The treatment in the present work of the first level and so on is based upon the Sutra on the Ten Levels; and in that scripture, the subject is covered by making a very definite distinction between the way that someone at the first level outshines the listeners & self-made buddhas by virtue of the deceptive form of the Wish for enlightenment which they possess, and the way that they do so by virtue of the ultimate form of this Wish that they have reached.


[369]
DE’I TSE SA GANG NAS RTOGS PAS ZIL GYIS GNON SNYAM PA’I DOGS PA SKYE BA BSAL BA’I PHYIR DU, SA BDUN PA NAS RTOGS PAS ZIL GYIS GNON PAR GSUNGS PA DE NYID, GZHUNG ‘DIR YANG BKOD PA YIN PAS SHIN TU YANG SKABS LA BAB [f. 30b] PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And at this juncture in that text, it is stated that they are outshined—from the seventh level on—by virtue of realizations.  This statement is made in order to remove any possible doubt coming up where a person might wonder at exactly what level it is that these two types of practitioners are outshone by virtue of realizations.  As such, our reader should understand that inserting this same point into our present text at this juncture is in fact highly germaine to the discussion.



The thinking of the autocommentary
on these subjects

[370]
GSUM PA LA GSUM, SA BCU PA’I MDOS NYAN RANG LA CHOS RANG BZHIN MED PAR RTOGS PA YOD PAR BSTAN PA DANG, DE SGRUB PA’I KHUNGS BSTAN PA DANG, DE LTAR BSTAN PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O,,

This brings us to our third step from above: an explanation of the conclusion that we can draw from statements about how the bodhisattva outshines others.  Here we will cover three topics: how the Sutra on the Ten Levels indicates that the listeners & self-made buddhas do possess the realization that things have no nature of their own; a presentation of authentic sources which prove this point; and a refutation of arguments concerning these presentations.


[371]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, ‘GREL PA MDZAD PA’I DGONGS PA GSAL BAR BSHAD PA DANG, DE NYID SPYOD ‘JUG GI LUGS SU’ANG BSTAN PA’O,,

The first of these we will cover in two parts: a clear explanation of what the author of the autocommentary actually had in mind; and a demonstration that the position accepted by the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life is just the same.


[372]
DANG PO NI, SA BCU PA LAS SA DRUG PA MAN CHAD DU RTOGS PA’I SGO NAS, NYAN RANG RNAMS ZIL GYIS GNON MI NUS PAR GSUNGS PA’I LUNG ‘DI LAS NI, NYAN RANG RNAMS LA YANG CHOS RANG BZHIN MED PAR SHES PA YOD DO, ZHES GSAL BAR NGES TE,

Here is the first.  And so The Ten Levels does say that—at the sixth and lower levels—one cannot outshine the listeners & self-made buddhas by virtue of their realizations.  And from this scriptural citation, we can very clearly perceive that these listeners & self-made buddhas do also possess an understanding that things have no nature of their own.


[373]
DE GNYIS LA SHES RAB DE MED NA ‘JIG RTEN PA’I LAM ZHI RAGS KYI RNAM PA CAN GYIS SRID RTZE MA GTOGS PA’I SA LA ‘DOD CHAGS DANG BRAL BA’I DRANG SRONG RNAMS BZHIN DU,

If these two types of practitioners lacked this wisdom, they would resemble those sages who have freed themselves from desire for any of the different levels of the cycle—with the exception of the level called “Peak of Existence”—by utilizing a worldly path: one which depends only upon moving up through discursive mental states of increasing subtlety.


[374]
NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM PA DE DAG KYANG DON DAM PA’I SEMS DANG PO BSKYED PAS KYANG, RTOGS PA’I SGO NAS ZIL GYIS GNON PAR ‘GYUR TE, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN MED PAR SHES PA DANG BRAL BA’I PHYIR RO,,

In this case, one would outshine—by virtue of their realizations—enemy destroyers who follow the path of the listener or the self-made buddha by nothing more than their first experience of the ultimate form of the Wish.  And this would be because those two types of practitioners lacked a perception of how things lacked any nature of their own.


[375]
PHYI ROL MU STEGS BYED BZHIN DU NYAN RANG GIS KHAMS GSUM NA SPYOD PA’I NYON MONGS PA THAMS CAD SA BON DANG BCAS PA SPANGS PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR BAR GSUNGS PA NI, STONG NYID LEGS PAR RTOGS NAS GOMS PA MED NA, NYON MONGS KYI SA BON ZAD PAR BYED MI NUS PA, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I LAM ZHI RAGS KYI RNAM PA CAN DANG ‘DRA BAR BSTAN TO,,

And then, the sutra is saying, these listeners & self-made buddhas would end up being the same as those of other traditions—those of the lower systems, who have failed to eliminate everything connected to negative emotions, and the seeds for these, relating to any of the three realms.  What this is saying is that—if we fail to perceive emptiness perfectly, and get used to what we perceived—then we could never be able to finish off the seeds for negative emotions; and then our efforts would end up being like those who follow the path of the world, trying to go from one discursive state of meditation to another, from rough to fine.


[376]
DE KHO NA [f. 31a] NYID RTOGS PA DANG BRAL NA, GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I PHUNG PO LA BDEN PAR DMIGS PAS, BLO PHYIN CI LOG TU GYUR PA’I PHYIR, GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MTSAN NYID RDZOGS PA RTOGS PA MED PAR ‘GYUR TE, BDAG DANG GANG ZAG TU ‘DOGS PA’I GZHI, PHUNG PO LA BDEN PAR DMIGS PA’I YUL SUN PHYUNG BA MED PAS PHYIR RO,,

If we are without the realization of suchness, then we will see the parts of ourselves—our physical form & the rest—as being real; and then our mind is purely mistaken.  Because of this then we are without the realization, complete in every respect, that the person is not himself, or herself.  This in turn is because we would have failed to rip out, from its roots, the object that the tendency to see the parts of us as real thinks it sees; and these parts are in fact the very thing that is labelled “me,” or “the person.”


[377]
‘DIS NI GDAGS GZHI PHUNG PO LA BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I ZHEN YUL SUN MA PHYIN NA, BTAGS CHOS GANG ZAG LA BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA’I ZHEN YUL YANG SUN MI PHYIN PAS, GANG ZAG BDEN MED DU MA RTOGS PA’I PHYIR, GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MTSAN NYID RDZOGS PA MA RTOGS PAR BSTAN NO,,

What’s being said here is that—if we are not able to use this realization to rip out the object that the belief in the thing we label ourselves (the parts of us) believes is real—then we will fail, in turn, to rip out the object that our tendency to think that things are real believes is real when it focuses on the result of the labeling: the person themselves.  And then we will fail to realize that the person has no reality; and then we will fail to reach a realization which is complete in every respect as it sees that the person is not themselves.


[378]
DE LTAR SNGAR BSHAD PA DE DAG GI DON SHIN TU RTOGS DKA’ LA, LUGS ‘DI DANG ZHI BA LHA’I GZHUNG LA BRTEN PA RNAMS KYIS KYANG LEGS PAR MA SHOD SNANG BAS, ‘DI’I MTHA’ BCAD PA LA DOGS PA SKYE TSUL DANG, DE SEL TSUL GTAN LA PHAB NA,

The points that we have just elucidated are extremely difficult to grasp; it would seem that even in our own immediate tradition—and even among those who follow Master Shantideva’s classic—people have failed to give these ideas a proper explanation.  To resolve the various issues then we could first examine how different questions come up in various people’s minds; and after that set forth a way of addressing them.


[379]
GAL TE GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS YOD PHUNG PO DANG NGO BO GCIG TU MED PA DANG, DE LAS THA DAD PAS STONG PA’I STONG BDAG MED DANG, MI RTAG PA LA SOGS PA BCU DRUG TU TSAD MAS GTAN LA PHEBS PA NI NGES PAR ‘ONG LA, DE BYUNG BA NA DE’I GDUL BYA’I GTZO BO RNAMS KYIS, DE LA SHIN TU GOMS PAR BYED PA YANG ‘ONG NGO,,

So say, first, that someone were to think the following:

Suppose we are finally able to establish, through an accurate perception, the fact that nothing is itself: suppose we are able to establish an emptiness where a person who was substantial—in the sense of being self-standing—could neither be one with the parts to that person, nor separate from those parts; and where the 16 aspects of impermanence & the rest applied to this person.  If this were to happen, then the primary students of this approach would in turn be able to accustom themselves quite perfectly to this emptiness.


[380]
DE BYAS NA GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED DE MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA ‘ONG BA NI, RNAL ‘BYOR MNGON [f. 31b] SUM SGRUB PA’I RIGS PA RNAMS KYIS ‘GRUB BO,,

And if they were, then they would come to be able to perceive—directly—the fact that the person is not themselves.  This fact is established by the logic with which we establish the existence of a direct, mystic perception.


[381]
DE LTAR NA DE RTOGS PA’I MTHONG LAM GYIS NYON MONGS KUN BRTAGS RNAMS SPONG BA ‘GRUB BO, ,DE GRUB NA GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MNGON SUM DU MTHONG ZIN GOMS PAR BYED PA’I SGOM LAM YANG ‘GRUB PAS, LHAN SKYES KYI NYON MONGS KYANG SPONG NUS PAS,

If this is the case, then we can establish that the path of seeing whereby we perceive this fact eliminates the learned forms of negative emotions.  And if we can establish that, then we can in turn establish the existence of a path of habituation, where we accustom ourselves to the lack of a self to the person which we have already seen directly.  This then means that we also have the capacity to eliminate the inborn forms of negative emotions.


[382]
NYON MONGS PA’I ZAG PA THAMS CAD ZAD PA ‘GRUB PAS STONG NYID MA RTOGS KYANG, KHAMS GSUM GYI PHRA RGYAS THAMS CAD SA BON DANG BCAS PA SPONG BAR NUS TE,

Having thus established that we would have eliminated all forms of the impurity caused by the negative emotions; we can say that—even without realizing emptiness—one can eliminate each & every widespread, negative emotion of all three of the realms, along with the seeds for these emotions.


[383]
JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I TSUL DU MTHONG SGOM GNYIS KYIS SPANGS PA NI, ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I LAM GYI SPONG TSUL YIN PA’I PHYIR RO, ,DES NA MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG SGOM PA’I LAM GYIS KYANG NYON MONGS THAMS CAD ZAD PAR NUS SO ZHE NA,

And this is true because the process that we have just described here—where the elimination is done through the pair of the path of seeing & the path of habituation—is in fact the very way in which we eliminate these negativities by using the path which transcends the world.  In conclusion then we can say that it is possible, as well, to finish off each & every negative emotion by using the path of meditating upon the 16 aspects of impermanence, & the rest.


[384]
‘DI LA BSHAD PAR BYA STE, DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA MA RNYED KYANG MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG TSAD MAS GTAN LA PHEBS PA DANG, DE’I GDUL BYA RNAMS KYIS DON DE BRTZON PA CHEN POS SGOM PA DANG, BSGOMS PA LAS GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED RAGS PA MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA DANG, MTHONG ZIN GOMS PAR BYED PA NI MI ‘ONG ZHES KHO BO CAG MI SMRA’O,,

Let us then present our response.  We are not saying that it is impossible that—even without coming to the view of suchness—a person cannot use accurate perception to establish the 16 aspects of impermanence & the rest; and that the students who follow this approach cannot then expend great effort in meditating upon these points; and that as a result of this meditation they cannot perceive, directly, the gross form of the lack of a self to the person; and that they cannot then accustom themselves to what they have succeeded in seeing.


[385]
‘O NA CI ZHE NA, DE ‘DRA BA’I LAM DE GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MTSAN NYID RDZOGS PAR RTOGS PA MIN PAS, LAM DE MTHONG LAM DANG ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I SGOM LAM DU MI ‘DOD DO,,

“Well then,” one may ask, “what are you saying?”  What we are saying is that this kind of approach does not constitute a perception of the lack of self to a person which is complete in every respect.  This being the case, we cannot agree that this approach is the path of seeing, or a form of the path of habituation which has transcended the world.


[386]
DE’I PHYIR MTHONG SPANG DANG, SGOM SPANG GANG GI YANG SA BON SPONG MI NUS [f. 32a] PAS, LAM DE MTHONG LAM DANG SGOM LAM DU BSHAD PA DANG, SPANG BYA GNYIS SA BON DANG BCAS PA SPONG BAR BSHAD PA DANG, LAM DE GNYIS KYI MTHAR DGRA BCOM PA ‘THOB PAR BSHAD PA NI, DRANG BA’I DON DU ‘GREL BA’I LUGS YIN TE,

And for this reason, the approach you have described cannot enable one to eliminate the seeds either of those negativities which we eliminate with the path of seeing; or of those which we eliminate with the path of habituation.  And this means that we must interpret as metaphoric any system which says that this kind of approach could be either the path of seeing or the path of habituation; or which says that with it we can eliminate these two types of objects to be eliminated, along with their seeds; or which says that at the end of two paths of this type we would ever be able to achieve the state of an enemy destroyer.


[387]
DPER NA SEMS TZAM PAS RDUL CHA MED DANG, DE BSAGS PA’I PHYI DON DANG, DE LAS RDZAS THA DAD PA’I ‘DZIN PA GNYIS BKAG PA YANG TSAD MAS ‘GRUB CING, DES ‘DUL BA’I GDUL BYAS RING DU GOMS PAR BYAS NA, DON DE MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA DANG, MTHONG ZIN GOMS PAR BYED PA ‘GRUB TU CHUG KYANG, DE’I STENG NAS SA BCU DANG, LAM PHYI MA GSUM BGROD PA DBU MA PAS DRANG DON DU ‘GREL BA BZHIN NO,,

Followers of the Middle Way school can, for example, accept the idea that those of the Mind Only school might disprove, through an accurate perception, the two ideas that (1) atoms could have sides, and that outer objects composed of such atoms could exist; and (2) there could exist a perception of these objects which was substantially separate from them—and that students for whom this school was meant might then accustom themselves to these positions over a long period of time; and finally come to perceive them directly; and then get used to what they had at that point seen directly.  But as for saying that this process could be used to go higher, to the ten levels; or to travel the latter three paths; those of the middle way would interpret any such pronouncements as only metaphoric.


[388]
MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG SGOM PA YIN KYANG, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED RTOGS PA NYID NYON MONGS LAS GROL BAR BYED PA’I LAM DU ‘DOD PA YIN TE, 

The approach described is a meditation upon the 16 aspects of impermanence, and so on; but it is only the perception of how the person is not themselves—the perception which we described above—which we accept as the path which can free us from our negative emotions.


[388]
KUN LAS BTUS LAS, BDAG MED PA’I YID BYED KYIS NYON MONGS SPONG LA, RNAM PA LHAG MA RNAMS DE YONGS SU SBYONG BA’I THABS SU GSUNGS PA DANG,

As The Compendium puts it, a state of mind where you are focused on how nothing is itself can enable you to eliminate your negative emotions; but all the rest of the ways of looking at things are only methods of improving on them.


[389]
RNAM ‘GREL LAS KYANG,
,STONG NYID LTA BAS GROL ‘GYUR GYI,
,SGOM PA LHAG MA DE DON YIN,
,ZHES SNGA MA DANG MTHUN PAR GSUNGS PAS SO,,

The Commentary on Accurate Perception is in agreement with the preceding where it says,

The view of emptiness
Will free you;

All other meditations
Are just to get you there.


[390]
STONG NYID LTA BA ZHES PA’I TSIG TZAM LA ‘KHRUL NAS, RGYA GAR BA ‘GA’ ZHIG GIS KYANG DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA’I LTA BA LA ‘DOD PA NI DON MIN PAS, GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS [f. 32b] YOD KYIS STONG PA’I LTA BA YIN NO,,

Some of the Indian authors, misled by the wording of the expression “view of emptiness,” have taken the position that this last citation is referring to “view” in the sense of the realization of suchness; but that’s not what it’s talking about.  It is a view about the person being empty of existing substantially—an emptiness of any self-standing person.


[391]
LAM DES NYON MONGS KYI SA BON SPONG MI NUS KYANG, NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR BA NI RE ZHIG ‘GOG NUS TE, PHYI ROL PA DANG THUN MONG BA’I ZHI RAGS KYI RNAM PA CAN GYIS, CI YANG MED PA MAN CHAD KYI NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR SPONG BAR MNGON PA LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR ‘DOD DGOS NA, SNGAR GYI LAM GYIS MNGON GYUR RE ZHIG SPONG NUS PA LTA CI SMOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

That particular approach does not have the power to eliminate the seeds of the negative emotions, but it can for the time being block the manifest appearance of these emotions.  If though you insist on taking the above discussion as referring to statements in the literature on higher knowledge about eliminating the manifest form of negative emotions at the meditative level called “Nothing At All” on down—by utilizing a meditation that the non-Buddhists also use, going up and down through cursive states of meditation that are increasingly more or less subtle—then we couldn’t even say what we did, about the approach mentioned previously being able, for the time being, to eliminate the manifest form of these negative emotions.


[392]
NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR SPONG ZHES PA’I NYON MONGS KYANG, MNGON PA GNYIS NAS GSUNGS PA LTAR GYI DMIGS RNAM CAN GYI NYON MONGS YIN GYI, LUGS ‘DIS BDEN ‘DZIN NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PAR BSHAD PA DANG, DE’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’I LTA BA DANG LTA MIN GYI NYON MONGS MNGON PA LAS BSHAD TSUL LAS GZHAN RNAMS NI MNGON GYUR YANG SPONG BAR MI NUS SO,,

Even just the expression “manifest form of negative emotions” is a reference to negative emotions with a certain object of their focus, as described in the two presentations of higher knowledge.  The system of the present text though explains the tendency to believe things as real to be a kind of misunderstanding tied up with negative emotions.  Negative emotions from this point of view, whether they be ways of looking at things or other types of negative emotions—that is, those other than ones explained as they are in the works of higher knowledge—could in fact never be eliminated by the approach described, even in their manifest form.


[393]
MNGON PA NAS BSHAD PA’I SRID RTZE’I SAS BSDUS PA’I NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR, ZHI RAGS KYI RNAM PA CAN GYIS SPONG MI NUS KYANG, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED RAGS PA RTOGS PA’I LAM LA GOMS PAR BYAS PAS SPONG NUS SO,,

Manifest forms of negative thoughts as they are described in the literature on higher knowledge, and which are subsumed by the “Peak of Existence,” cannot be eliminated by the forms of meditation in which we go increasingly more subtle, still in a discursive state of mind.  They can though be eliminated by mastering the path in which we perceive a gross form of the way in which a person is not themselves, as just described.


[394]
DE DAG GIS NI ‘GREL PAR DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA DANG BRAL BA’I NYON MONGS KYI SPONG GNYEN DU BSHAD PA’I LAM RNAMS, ZHI RAGS KYI RNAM PA CAN GYI LAM DANG ‘DRA BA DANG, PHYI ROL PA BZHIN DU NYON MONGS THAMS CAD SPONG MI NUS PAR GSUNGS PA RNAMS GSAL BAR BSTAN TO,,

The point of these sections has been to describe, in a clear way, statements made in the commentary about how paths that don’t involve a perception of suchness but which are still described as antidotes we can use to eliminate negative emotions are in fact only the same as approaches involving moving through discursive meditative states of greater or lesser subtlety; and how they fail—as other traditions fail—to enable us to eliminate each & every one of our negative emotions.



How this is the position
of the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life

[395]
GNYIS PA NI, ‘DI NI [f. 33a] RGYAL SRAS CHEN PO ZHI BA LHA YANG BZHED DE, SPYOD ‘JUG LAS,

The position we’ve just described is, furthermore, also accepted by that great child of the victorious Buddhas, the bodhisattva Shantideva.  As the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life puts it,


[396]
,BDEN PA MTHONG BAS GROL ‘GYUR GYI,
,STONG NYID MTHONG BAS CI ZHIG BYA,

Only by seeing the truth
Can we be freed;

What use is it
To see emptiness?


[397]
ZHES BDEN BZHI MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG MTHONG BA’I LAM GYIS, NYON MONGS LAS GROL BAR ‘GYUR BAS, NYON MONGS ZAD PA’I DON DU RANG BZHIN MED PA’I STONG NYID MTHONG BA MI DGOS SO, ZHES PA’I LAN DU,

These lines present the mistaken position that we can be freed simply with a path which involves seeing the Four Truths—with their 16 aspects of impermanence & the rest; it is saying that it is not necessary to see a kind of emptiness where nothing has any nature of its own, in order to finish off our negative emotions.  In response to this position, the work continues with:


[398]
,GANG PHYIR LUNG LAS LAM ‘DI NI,
,MED PAR BYANG CHUB MED PAR GSUNGS,

But the use of it
Has been stated in scripture:
“Without this path,
There can be no enlightenment.”


[399]
ZHES RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PAR MTHONG BA’I LAM ‘DI MED PAR, BYANG CHUB GSUM GANG YANG THOB PA MED PAR GSUNGS TE, 

What this is saying is that—if we lack this path where we see how things are empty of existing through any nature of their own—then we cannot achieve any of the three forms of enlightenment.


[400]
GSUNGS TSUL NI SPYOD ‘JUG ‘GREL CHEN LAS, YUM GYI MDO LAS DNGOS PO’I ‘DU SHES CAN LA THAR PA MED PA DANG, DUS GSUM GA’I RGYUN ZHUGS NAS RANG RGYAL GYI BAR RNAMS SHER PHYIN ‘DI NYID LA BRTEN NAS THOB PAR GSUNGS PA DRANGS PA LTAR YIN GYI, BLA NA MED PA’I BYANG CHUB RKYANG PA LA BYED PA DON MIN NO,,

The way in which the work makes this statement is described in the Great Commentary on the “Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life,” where it recounts how the Mother Sutras say that there can be no freedom for those who still conceive of things as things, and how all those who achieve the goals from entering the stream on up to becoming a self-made buddha—whether they have already come, or are here now, or are yet to come—do so by utilizing this same perfection of wisdom.  And so it is not as if the point applies only to those who reach matchless enlightenment.


[401]
DE NAS BSTAN RTZA DGE SLONG NYID YIN NA, ZHES PA’I RKANG PA BZHIS SEMS BDEN ‘DZIN GYI DMIGS PA DANG BCAS PA’I LAM GYIS MYANG ‘DAS MI ‘THOB PAR YANG BSTAN NO,,

The four lines [in the Tibetan] which include “that special monk who is the foundation of the teachings” are also meant to convey that one cannot achieve nirvana by using a path in which ones mind is still wrapped up in seeing something in the way that we do when we are holding things to be real.


[402]
DE NAS NYON MONGS SPANGS PAS GROL NA DE’I, DE MA THAG TU DE ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I NYON MONGS SPANGS PAS GROL NA ZHES PA NI, PHYOGS SNGA MA’I LUGS BRJOD PA YIN LA,

The next lines in the Guide say:

If one were freed by this elimination
Of the negative emotions,
Then one would reach it
Just after that.

The part about “If one were freed by this elimination of the negative emotions” is a reiteration of the opponent’s position.


[403]
DE’I DON NI, BDEN PA [f. 33b] MTHONG BAS GROL ‘GYUR GYI, ZHES BSHAD PA BZHIN DU MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG GI LAM BSGOMS PAS, NYON MONGS SPANGS TE GROL BA ‘THOB NA ZHES BSHAD RGYU YIN TE, SKABS ‘DIR MI RTAG SOGS CU DRUG GI LAM TZAM GYIS NYON MONGS LAS GROL BA ‘THOB MI ‘THOB LA RTZOD PA’I PHYIR DANG, BDEN PA MTHONG BAS ZHES SOGS KYI RTZOD PA LAS SHIN TU GSAL BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here’s what the lines are referring to.  They should be read in the same way as we did the part that goes, “Only by seeing the truth / Can we be freed”—that is, “If one were freed by an elimination of the negative emotions which was brought about by meditating upon the path of impermanence & the rest of the 16 aspects of the Four Truths…”  This is because the whole point of this particular section is a disagreement about whether or not one can achieve liberation through using no more than the path of the 16 aspects of impermanence & the rest—and this is eminently clear from the preceding dispute upon the line about “seeing the truth.”


[404]
DES NA MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG GI LAM TZAM GYIS NYON MONGS ZAD PAR NUS PA KHAS BLANGS NAS, DES SDUG BSNGAL THAMS CAD LAS GROL BA MIN NO ZHES ‘CHAD PA NI ‘DI’I DON GTAN MIN NO,,

Therefore explaining this section as meaning that someone has accepted that nothing more than the path of the 16 aspects of impermanence & the rest can finish off the negative emotions, but that this does not free one from each & every form of suffering, is missing the point completely.


[405]
DE’I PHYIR LAM DES NYAN THOS SDE PA GNYIS DANG THUN MONG BA’I NYON MONGS SU BZHAG PA RNAMS, SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI LAM RGYUD LA BSKYED PAS, RE ZHIG MNGON GYUR DU RGYU BA MED PA’I TSE, NYON MONGS ZAD PA’I GROL BA THOB PAR ‘JOG NA, NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR TZAM RE ZHIG SPANGS PA DE’I DE MA THAG TU ZAG PA THAMS CAD ZAD PA’I GROL BA THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES ‘GOG PA DGONGS PA YIN NO,,

As such, the real intent of these lines is to refute the idea held by those who present the negative emotions in the same way as the two listener groups do, saying that—if we describe managing to develop within ourselves the path described earlier, and thus stopping, for the time being, the running of manifest forms of negative emotion, as attaining freedom in the form of finishing off the negative emotions—then it would be the case that just after the elimination of no more than manifest forms of negative emotion for a limited period of time, one would further reach a liberation where they had finished off each & every impurity.


[406]
DE ‘DOD PAR MI NUS PA NI,
,NYON MONGS MED KYANG DE DAG LA,
,LAS KYI NUS PA MTHONG BA YIN,

The fact that we cannot accept this position is indicated in the very next lines of the work:

Even though they lack
Those negative emotions,
We can still see the forces
Of karma in them.


[407]
ZHES NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR RE ZHIG MED KYANG, LAS KYI DBANG GIS YANG SRID PHYI MA ‘PHEN PA’I NUS PA MTHONG BAS SO, ZHES PAS STON NO,,

What these lines are saying is that—even though a person may lack those manifest forms of negative emotion for a limited period of time—we can still see in them the forces that project another future life, through the power of karma.


[408]
GZHUNG DE RNAMS NI DE LTAR BSHAD DGOS KYI, ‘GREL PA ‘GA’ ZHIG DANG BOD RNAMS, NYON MONGS [f. 34a] MED KYANG MOO GAL GYI BU DANG, ‘PHAGS PA SOR PHRENG CAN LA SOGS PA LA SNGON SO SKYE’I DUS SU BSAGS PA’I LAS KYI ‘BRAS BUS SDUG BSNGAL ‘BYIN PA MTHONG BAS, DE MA THAG TU GROL BA MA YIN NO, ,ZHES PA LTAR MI BYA STE,

This then is how we should explain these major works; we should not though follow the interpretation of a number of commentaries—and of certain Tibetan thinkers—who say that “We do not, just after that point, achieve liberation; because we can see examples such as those of Maudgalyayana and the realized being Anguli Mala, who because of the fruits of karma they had accumulated previously—when they were still normal beings—experienced suffering.”


[409]
‘DI NI TSE ‘DI’I SDUG BSNGAL SKYED PA’I NUS PA MIN GYI, LAS KYIS YANG SRID PHYI MA ‘PHEN PA’I NUS PA MI LDOG PAS GROL BA MED DO, ZHES STON DGOS PA’I PHYIR TE,

This is because we must interpret these statements as saying that one is not liberated so long as they have not yet stopped the capacity for karma to project another suffering life for them; this is not a reference to stopping the capacity for karma to produce suffering in this current life.


[410]
,STONG PA NYID DANG BRAL BA’I SEMS,
,’GAGS PA SLAR YANG SKYE ‘GYUR TE,
,’DU SHES MED PA’I SNYOMS ‘JUG BZHIN,

As the text continues,

For a mind still left
Without emptiness,
They may stop; but then
Once more spring forth—

Just as we see with the meditation
Where discrimination is stopped.


[411]
ZHES GSUNGS TE DE’I DON STONG PA NYID KYI RTOGS PA DANG BRAL NA, LAM GZHAN BSGOMS PAS NYON MONGS DANG BCAS PA’I SEMS RE ZHIG ‘GAGS KYANG, GTAN NAS LOG PA MIN PAS SLAR YANG NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR DU SKYE BAS, LAS KYI DBANG GIS ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHOR BA MI ‘CHAD CES PA’I DON YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The point being made here is to say that a person who is still left without a realization of emptiness may be able to practice other paths and thus manage—temporarily—to stop states of mind that possess negative emotions.  These states are not though then stopped permanently; and so manifest negative emotions will once more spring forth.  And because of them, the power of karma will assure that the person continues to circle through the wheel of suffering.
 

[412]
NYON MONGS DANG BCAS PA’I SEMS RE ZHIG ‘GAGS PA ‘ONG BAR BSTAN PA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR SPANGS PA RE ZHIG ‘ONG BA’I DON NO,,

Saying here that “it will come that states of mind which possess negative emotions will temporarily be stopped” has the meaning, as we spoke of earlier, that “it will come that one is able to eliminate, temporarily, manifest forms of negative emotion.”


[413]
LAS KYI NUS PA MTHONG BA YIN, ZHES PA’I LAN DU,
,RE ZHIG NYER LEN SRED PA NI,
,MED CES NGES PA NYID CE NA,
ZHES YANG SRID LEN PA’I SRED PA LAM DES ZAD PAR BYED PAS, LAS KYI DBANG GIS YANG SRID PHYI MA MI LEN PAR NGES PA NYID DO,

In response to the statement that “We can still see the forces / Of karma in them,” we find the lines,

And suppose you say it’s assured,
Since the material cause
Of initial desire is absent,
For the moment.

Which is to say: “Given that these paths have finished off the initial desire which causes us to take our next rebirth, it is assured that we will not be forced by karma to take this rebirth.”


[414]
ZHES PA’I LAN DU,
,SRED ‘DI NYON MONGS CAN MIN YANG,
,KUN [f. 34b] RMONGS BZHIN DU CI STE MED,
CES PHA ROL POS KUN RMONGS MI SHES PA LA, MNGON PA NAS BSHAD PA LTAR GYI NYON MONGS YIN PA CIG DANG, DE MIN PA GNYIS ‘DOD PA BZHIN DU, SRED PA YANG MNGON PA NAS BSHAD PA LTAR GYI NYON MONGS CAN YIN PA CIG DANG MIN PA CIG KYANG CI’I PHYIR MI ‘DOD, CES GSUNGS SO,,

We respond in turn to this statement with:

It may be that this initial desire
Is not the type
Possessed of negative emotion;

But why couldn’t it be
Like the negative side of things?

These words are being addressed to an opponent who doesn’t understand the concept of the “negative side of things.”  That is, we recognize two kinds of negative emotions: the kind that is presented in the works on higher knowledge, and another which is different.  And what we are asking them in these lines is why they couldn’t agree that a similar distinction could be drawn with initial desire: a type possessing negative emotion which is similar to that described in the works on higher knowledge; and a type which is different.


[415]
DE NI SDE PA GNYIS DANG THEG CHEN PA LA THUN MONG DU GRAGS PA LTAR GYI NYON MONGS CAN MA YIN PA’I SRED PA YOD PAR STON GYI RANG LUGS KYIS SRED PA DE, NYON MONGS CAN DU MI ‘DOD PA MIN NO,,

This statement, by the way, is meant to indicate that there is a type of initial desire which is common to both the two groups and to the greater way, and which is not possessed of negative emotions.  It is not though meant to say that according to our own system this particular form of initial desire is not possessed of negative emotions.


[416]
DES NA GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS YOD DU ‘DZIN PA’I BDAG ‘DZIN GYIS DRANGS PA’I SRED PA MNGON GYUR BA RE ZHIG SPANGS KYANG, GANG ZAG NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTAS DRANGS PA’I SRED PA CI STE MED CES PA YIN PAS, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I MNGON GYUR SPANGS PA LA NI, BSHAD MA THAG PA’I ‘JIG LTA DANG SRED PA MNGON GYUR BA YANG MI LDOG GO ,

Therefore what we are saying here is: “It may indeed be the case that one has eliminated, for the time being, manifest forms of that initial desire which is brought on by the tendency to grasp to some self-nature which holds that the individual is substantial, in the sense of being self-standing.  Why though would this preclude the form of initial desire that is brought on by the view of destruction which grasps to the idea that the individual could exist in & of itself?”  The point is that a person who has eliminated the manifest form that we mentioned earlier will not have eliminated, in addition, the view of destruction that we just described; nor the manifest form of initial desire.


[417]
GAL TE LUGS DE GNYIS KA’I NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR BA SPANGS NA, GNYIS KA’I SA BON MA SPANGS PAR NI ‘DRA LA, MNGON GYUR YOD MED LA KHYAD MA BYUNG NA, SRED PA LA KHYAD PAR PHYE BA DON MED DO,

If both these systems are similar in saying that—if one has eliminated the manifest form of negative emotion in the system, then one will not have eliminated the seed for the negative emotion as it is described in the same system—then there is actually no difference to be drawn at this juncture between possessing the manifest form or not.  And in this case it would be meaningless to draw any distinction between different forms of the initial desire.


[418]
,TSOR BA’I RKYEN GYIS SRED PA YIN,
,TSOR BA DE DAG LA YANG YOD,

As the next lines themselves point out,

Initial desire occurs
Because of the factor of feelings—

And they still possess
These feelings.


[419]
CES GSUNGS PAS NI LAM GZHAN GYIS NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR BA GZHAN SPANGS PA LA, SRED PA MI LDOG PA’I RGYU MTSAN STON TE, DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA’I LTA BA DANG [f. 35a] BRAL NA, TSOR BA LA BDEN ‘DZIN GYI MA RIG PA CUNG ZAD KYANG MI SPONG LA,

What’s being described here is a reason why other paths cannot be used to put a stop to initial desire, which in turn is necessary to eliminate the manifest form of other negative emotions; that is, a person who still lacks the viewpoint with which they realize suchness will continue to be unable to eliminate even the tiniest bit of that misunderstanding which holds that feelings have some real nature of their own.


[420]
DE LTA NA TSOR BA BDE BA SKYES PA NA MI ‘BRAL BAR SRED PA DANG, TSOR BA SDUG BSNGAL SKYES PA NA ‘BRAL ‘DOD KYI SRED PA CI’I PHYIR MI SKYE STE, MTHUN RKYEN TSANG ZHING ‘GAL RKYEN MED PA’I RGYU LAS ‘BRAS BU SKYE BAR NGES PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Why then in this case would we not see the arising of a form of initial desire where the person was hoping not to be separated from some feeling of pleasure that had come up in their life; and another form of this desire where the person was hoping to be separated from some feeling of pain that had made its own appearance?  For it is absolutely certain that a given result will occur, in a case where all the conditions which support its growth are complete, even as all the conditions which might impede its growth are absent.


[421]
RANG LUGS KYI TSOR BA LA SRED PA LDOG LUGS NI,
,GANG TSE TSOR PO ‘GA’ MED CING,
,TSOR BA’ANG YOD PA MA YIN PA,
,DE TSE GNAS SKABS ‘DI MTHONG NAS,
,SRED PA CI PHYIR LDOG MI ‘GYUR,

The position of our own system on how to prevent initial desire towards a particular feeling is described in the following lines—

At a certain point,
We see that there is no one
Doing the feeling;

Nor any feeling
For them to have.

Why then by this time
Would initial desire
Not come to a stop?


[422]
ZHES SPYOD ‘JUG LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR YIN TE, TSOR BA PO DANG TSOR BA ‘GA’ YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR MTHONG BA GOMS NA, SRED PA LDOG PAR BSTAN PAS, DE ‘DRA BA’I LAM MED NA SRED PA THAMS CAD CI’I PHYIR LDOG CES PAR YANG STON NO,,

It’s just as the Guide is putting it here.  At some point, the lines are teaching us, we are able to see—and become accustomed to the fact—that there is no one at all doing the feeling, and no feeling at all for them to have, which exist through some nature of their own.  And it is at this point that we are able to stop initial desire.  The lines are also, in effect, saying: “How then, in the absence of such a path, would you ever be able to stop all forms of initial desire?”


[423]
‘DI NI RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LAS,
,GNAS DANG BCAS PA’I SEMS LDAN LA,
,NYON MONGS DUG CHEN CIS MI ‘BYUNG,
,ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NO,,

This is also the point being made in The Sixty Verses on Reasoning where it says,

Why wouldn’t the great venom
Of the negative emotions

Rise within a person
Who possesses a state of mind
With an opportunity?


[424]
TSOR BA YOD PA’I RGYU MTSAN GYIS SRED PA YOD PAR GSUNGS PA LA, RGYU YOD PAS ‘BRAS BU YOD PAR SGRUB MI NUS PAS LEGS PA MIN ZHES CHA PA DANG, RTZEGS DBANG PHYUG SENG GES SPYOD ‘JUG ‘GOG PA NI,

Chapa and Tsek Wangchuk Senge have attempted to refute the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, claiming that this statement that “A person possesses initial desire for the reason that they possess feelings” is imperfect, since the presence of a cause does not necessarily establish the presence of its result.


[425]
NYAN THOS LA CHOS KYI BDAG MED RTOGS PA YOD MED GNYIS BOD NA PHYI MA GRAGS CHE ZHING, LUGS DE LA GOMS PA SHAS CHE BA DANG, PHYOGS DANG PO’I LUNG RIGS RNAMS LA MTHA’ [f. 35b] CHOD PAR MA SBYANGS PAS, RIGS PA BRLING PO’I DON ZHIB TU MA RNYED PAR MKHAS PA CHEN PO LA GYA TSOM DU SKYON BZUNG BA’I NOR PA CHEN PO’O,,

Now there are two positions taken about whether practitioners on the listener track are able to perceive the lack of a self-nature to things: some say yes, and some say no.  The  latter position has become more widespread here in Tibet.  The problem with these two thinkers is that they were more familiar with this position, and failed to acquaint themselves with the exhaustive analysis necessary to establish the former position through both scriptural authority & reasoning.  And so they have fallen into a stupendous error, unable to unravel subtle shades of reasoning and thus accusing a truly great sage of error, with no foundation for doing so.


[426]
DE BZHIN DU ZLA BA’I ZHABS LA BOD RNAMS KYIS SKYON BZUNG BA ‘GA’ ZHIG SNANG BA YANG, PHYOGS SNGA MA ZHIB TU YE MA GO BAR SKYON LTAR SNANG BRJOD PAS, RANG GI DE NYID STON PA MKHAS PAS MTHONG NA SHIN TU NGO TSA BA’I GNAS KHO NAR SNANG NGO,,

So too we have seen some Tibetans of the past who considered the great Chandrakirti to have made some kind of errors—but these are just false errors seen by a person who has no understanding at all of the finer points of the former position.  And so if a sage were to see the way that these people themselves describe suchness, it seems that it would be no more than a total embarrassment.


[427]
DE LTAR NA ‘GREL BSHAD LAS MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG GI LAM GYIS NYON MONGS KUN BRTAGS SPONG NUS LA, LHAN SKYES SPONG MI NUS SO ZHES KHYAD PAR ‘BYED PA YANG RIGS PA MA YIN TE,

As such it is also wrong to draw a distinction of saying that the Explanation states that a person can eliminate learned forms of negative emotion by using the path of impermanence & the rest of the 16 aspects; and yet not thus eliminate inborn forms.


[428]
THEG PA THUN MONG BA LA GRAGS PA’I NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR TZAM RE ZHIG SPONG BA LA NI, KUN BRTAGS DANG LHAN SKYES GNYIS ‘DRA LA, SA BON SPONG MI NUS PA YANG GNYIS KA LA ‘DRA BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Even with the question of eliminating just manifest forms of negative emotions—as they are described in the way which is common to the schools, and then only for some period of time—the case with both learned forms and inborn forms is similar; and the point is also similar for both regarding the issue of whether one is able to eliminate the seeds or not.


[429]
‘DIR ZLA BA DANG ZHI BA LHA GNYIS DGONGS PA GCIG TU ‘CHAD MA SHES ‘DUG GO

On this matter, people haven’t understood how to explain both Master Chandrakirti and Master Shantideva as having the same idea.


[430]
,PHUNG PO BDEN MED DU MA RTOGS NA, GANG ZAG BDEN MED DU MI RTOGS LA, DE LTA NA GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MI RTOGS PA NI, DPER NA PHUNG SOGS KYI CHOS BDEN PAS STONG PA CHOS KYI BDAG MED DU ‘JOG PA LTAR, GANG ZAG BDEN MED KYANG GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED DU GZHAG DGOS TE, RGYU MTSAN KUN NAS MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

If one fails to realize that the parts of a person have no reality, then they will also fail to realize that the person themself has no reality; and then they will fail to realize that the person has no nature of being themself.  We must, for example, describe the fact that things have no nature of being themselves as referring to the fact that things—in the form of the parts of a person and so on—are devoid of any reality.  Just so, we must describe the fact that the person has no nature of being themself as referring to the fact that the person is devoid of any reality: the reason is completely the same.


[431]
DE LTA NA GANG ZAG BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA GANG ZAG GI BDAG ‘DZIN DU GZHAG DGOS PAS, DE MA ZAD BAR DU NYON MONGS THAMS CAD ZAD PA MI ‘ONG BA DANG, GANG [f. 36a] ZAG DANG CHOS LA BDEN ‘DZIN NYON MONGS SU ‘JOG DGOS PA YIN TE, ZHI BA LHA’I LUGS LA’ANG ‘DI NYID RNAM PAR BZHAG DGOS SO,,

As such, we must describe the tendency to hold that the person is real as being the tendency to hold that the person is themself.  And then we would have to say that—until such time as we manage to finish off this tendency—then we could never finish off all of our negative emotions.  We must also describe the two tendencies of holding that the person is real, and that things are real, as being themselves negative emotions.  And we would have to describe it exactly this same way in the system of Master Shantideva as well.



Sutras of the greater way
which prove the same point

[432]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, THEG CHEN GYI MDO’I SHES BYED DGOD PA DANG, BSTAN BCOS DANG THEG DMAN GYI MDO’I SHES BYED DGOD PA’O,,

This brings us to the second topic in our explanation of the conclusion that we can draw from statements about how the bodhisattva outshines others: a presentation of authentic sources which prove the point that listeners & self-made buddhas do possess the realization that things have no nature of their own.  We proceed in two steps, presenting sutras of the greater way which prove this point; and then presenting classical commentaries, and sutras of the lower way, which also prove the point.


[433]
DANG PO NI, LHAG PA’I BSAM PA BSTAN PAS ZHUS PA TSIG GSAL DU DRANGS PA LAS,

Here is the first.  Our point is stated in very clear terms in The Section Requested by Sthira Adhyashaya, as this work is quoted in A Clarification of the Verses:


[434]
DPER NA MI LA LA ZHIG GIS SGYU MA MKHAN GYI ROL MO BYUNG BA’I TSE, SGYU MA MKHAN GYIS SPRUL PA’I BUD MED MTHONG NAS, ‘DOD CHAGS KYI SEMS SKYED DE, DE ‘DOD CHAGS KYIS SEMS DKRIS NAS ‘KHOR GYIS ‘JIGS SHING BAG TSA STE, STAN LAS LANGS NAS SONG STE

“There are for example some people who—when the magician begins his music—lay eyes on a woman conjured up by this sorcerer.  They then begin to feel lust for her and, overcome by this lust, they jump up from their seats; much to the concern and consternation of those around them, they run to the woman.”


[435]
DE SONG NAS KYANG BUD MED DE NYID LA MI SDUG PAR YID LA BYED CING, MI RTAG PA DANG SDUG BSNGAL BA DANG STONG PA DANG BDAG MED PAR YID LA BYED NA,

“But once they approach her they begin to think of this woman as being unattractive; and they think of her as impermanent; and something painful; and empty and not even herself.”


[436]
RIGS KYI BU DE JI SNYAM DU SEMS, MI DE YANG DAG PAR ZHUGS PA YIN NAM ‘ON TE LOG PAR ZHUGS PA YIN,

“And so I ask you, o child of noble family.  Do these people know what they are doing, or not?”


[437]
GSOL BA BCOM LDAN ‘DAS GANG BUD MED MA MCHIS PA LA MI SDUG PAR YID LA BYED CING, MI RTAG PA DANG SDUG BSNGAL BA DANG STONG PA DANG, BDAG MED PAR YID LA BGYID PA’I MI DE’I MNGON PAR BRTZON PA DE NI LOG PA LAGS SO,,

And the bodhisattva Sthira Adhyashaya replied, “O Conqueror, for people to make the effort to think of an impossible woman as being unattractive; and to think of her as being impermanent; and something painful; and empty, and not even herself, would show that they didn’t know what they were doing.”


[438]
BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS BKA’ STZAL PA, RIGS KYI BU ‘DI NA DGE SLONG DANG DGE SLONG MA DANG, DGE BSNYEN DANG DGE BSNYEN MA KHA CIG MA SKYES SHING MA [f. 36b] BYUNG BA’I CHOS RNAMS LA MI SDUG PAR YID LA BYED CING, MI RTAG PA DANG SDUG BSNGAL BA DANG STONG PA DANG BDAG MED PAR YID LA BYED PA GANG YIN PA DE DAG KYANG DE DANG ‘DRA BAR BLTA BAR BYA’O,,

And the Conqueror spoke, “O child of noble family, there are here a number of monks, and nuns, and men and women with lifetime vows, who look at things which have never started, and never even happened, and think of them as being unattractive; and think of them as impermanent; and empty; and painful; and not even themselves.  You should view them as being the same as those other people.”


[439]
NGA NI MI BLUN PO DE DAG LA LAM SGOM PA YIN NO ZHES MI SMRA STE DE DAG NI LOG PAR ZHUGS PA ZHES BYA’O, ZHES SHIN TU GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

“And I do not say that foolish people such as these are practicing the path—for they don’t know what they are doing.”


[440]
SGYU MA’I BUD MED LA BUD MED DNGOS SU BZUNG NAS, DE LA MI RTAG SOGS SU YID LA BYED PA DANG, PHUNG PO BDEN PAR BZUNG NAS PHUNG PO LA MI RTAG PA LA SOGS PA LNGAR YID LA BYED PA GNYIS DPE DON DU SBYAR BA LA,

What we have here is a metaphor and the thing to which the metaphor refers.  That is, someone is taking an illusory woman to be a real one, and then thinking of her as impermanent & the rest.  And this refers to someone who is taking the parts of a person to be real, and then thinking of them in these five different ways—impermanent and so on.


[441]
BDEN PA’I PHUNG PO DMIGS PAR BYAS NAS MI RTAG SOGS SU YID LA BYED PA CIG KYANG YOD LA, DE NI ZHEN YUL LA ‘KHRUL BA’I LOG SHES RKYANG PA YIN PAS, TSAD MAS GRUB PA MIN KYANG 

And so there are people who think they are looking at parts to a person which are real, and who think of them as impermanent and such—but their state of mind is a total misperception, mistaken in the object that it believes it sees.  Therefore we can go further and say the object here is not even one which is established by an accurate perception.


[442]
BDEN ‘DZIN GYI YUL SUN PHYUNG BA’I LTA BA MA RNYED PA’I RGYUD LA, BDEN BRDZUN GANG GIS KYANG KHYAD PAR DU MA BYAS PA’I PHUNG PO LA DMIGS NAS, DE GNYIS GANG GIS KYANG KHYAD PAR DU MA BYAS PA’I MI RTAG PA SOGS SU THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS GRUB PA DU MA ZHIG ‘ONG LA, SGOM PA’I TSE YANG DON DE BSGOMS PAS SNGAR BSHAD PA BZHIN GYI LAM RGYUD LA SKYE’O,,

The mind of this person—one who has yet to arrive at the viewpoint in which the object of the tendency to hold things as real has been demolished—is focusing on the parts of the person and failing to make any distinction at all between what is real & what is false.  And then they do manage to establish, but only with accurate perception operating at a nominal level, no small number of facts such as impermanence & the rest—even as they fail to make the distinction between these two.  And since when they then meditate they are meditating on these particular kinds of facts, the path that arises in their mind looks like the one we described above.


[443]
YANG ‘PHAGS PA BSAM GTAN PA’I DPE MKHYUD KYI MDO TSIG GSAL DU DRANGS PA LAS KYANG, ‘JAM DPAL ‘PHAGS PA’I BDEN PA RNAMS YANG DAG PA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU MA MTHONG BAS, SEMS CAN PHYIN CI LOG BZHIS SEMS PHYIN CI LOG TU GYUR PA [f. 37a] RNAMS ‘KHOR BA YANG DAG PA MA YIN PA ‘DI LAS ‘DA’ BAR MI ‘GYUR RO,

We also see in A Clarification of the Verses the following citation of the Sutra of the Realized Being “Possessiveness of Meditation”:

O Manjushri, there are people whose minds are misled by the four misperceptions, for they have yet to see—correctly, in just the way they are—the higher truths.  And these people will never be able to go beyond this impurity, the cycle of suffering.


[444]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LA ‘JAM DPAL GYIS, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS GANG LA NYE BAR DMIGS PAS SEMS CAN RNAMS ‘KHOR BA LAS ‘DA’ BAR MI ‘GYUR BA BSTAN DU GSOL,

And in response to these words, Manjushri says:

O Conqueror, could you explain to us what it is that people would have to have a viewpoint about which would cause their failure to go beyond this cycle of pain?


[445]
ZHES STON PAS BDEN BZHI YANG DAG PA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU MA SHES PAS, ‘KHOR BA LAS MI GROL BAR GSUNGS PA LA,

And the Teacher is saying that it is because they have failed to understand the four truths correctly, just as they are, that these people fail to achieve liberation from the cycle.


[446]
RJE BTZUN GYIS YUL GANG LA JI ‘DRA BA ZHIG TU DMIGS PAS, ‘KHOR BA LAS MI THAR BA BSHAD PA ZHUS PA’I LAN DU, BDAG NI ‘KHOR BA LAS ‘DA’ BA DANG, MYANG ‘DAS ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM DU BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I TSUL GYIS RTOG PAR BYED PAS, MI RTAG PA LA SOGS PA BSGOMS PA NA,

And so the Holy One is requesting an explanation of what object a person needs to focus upon—and in what way—in order to fail to free themselves from the cycle of suffering.  The response given to him is that there are people who meditate upon the aspects of impermanence and so on, but in a way in which they are imagining to themselves that things are real as they think to themselves, “I will go beyond the cycle of pain; I will reach nirvana.”


[447]
,BDAG GIS SDUG BSNGAL SHES SO, ,KUN ‘BYUNG SPANGS SO, ,’GOG PA MNGON DU BYAS SO, ,LAM BSGOMS SO SNYAM NAS BDAG NI DGRA BCOM PAR GYUR TO SNYAM PA ‘BYUNG BAR GSUNGS TE,

The Buddha mentions how they start thinking to themselves, “I will become an enemy destroyer: I will understand suffering; I will abandon the source of suffering; I will bring about the end of suffering; I will practice the path.”


[448]
SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR RE ZHIG SPANGS PA NA, ZAG PA THAMS CAD ZAD DO SNYAM PA SKYES PA’O, ,DE ‘CHI BA’I DUS KYI TSE RANG SKYE BA LEN PAR MTHONG BA NA, SANGS RGYAS LA THE TSOM ZOS PA’I NYES PAS, DMYAL BA CHEN POR LTUNG BAR GSUNGS SO, ,DE NI LAM DE LTA BU LA GNAS PA ‘GA’ ZHIG LA YIN GYI, THAMS CAD LA NI MA YIN NO,,

As we mentioned earlier, the scriptures describe how these people are able to eliminate—for the time being—manifest forms of negative emotions, and so the thought comes in their mind that “I have managed to finish off all my impurities.”  But then as they come to their death they perceive that they are going to take another birth, and so they begin to doubt the Buddha.  Because of this error they fall to the greater realms of hell.  This last by the way only happens with some of the people who are following this kind of path; it is not the case with everyone who does so.


[449]
DE NAS ‘JAM DPAL GYIS ‘PHAGS PA’I BDEN PA BZHI PO JI LTAR RTOGS PAR BGYI ZHUS [f. 37b] PA NI, SNGAR ‘KHOR BA LAS GROL BA LA BDEN BZHI YANG DAG PA JI LTA BA BZHIN SHES DGOS PAR GSUNGS PA DE ‘DIR DRIS PA’O,,

Manjushri then asks how it is that we are to correctly understand these four higher truths.  He is here asking about the earlier statement by the Conqueror that in order to gain liberation from the cycle of pain we must understand—correctly, and just as they are—the four truths.


[450]
DE’I LAN DU, ‘JAM DPAL GANG GIS ‘DU BYED THAMS CAD MA SKYES PAR MTHONG BA DES NI, SDUG BSNGAL YONGS SU SHES PA YIN NO,,

In reply, Lord Buddha says:

O Manjushri, anyone who sees that nothing involved in causing things ever starts has understood suffering, completely.


[451]
GANG GIS CHOS THAMS CAD ‘BYUNG BA MED PAR MTHONG BA DES NI KUN ‘BYUNG BA SPANGS PA YIN NO,,

Anyone who sees that nothing ever happens has abandoned the source of suffering.


[452]
GANG ZHIG CHOS THAMS CAD GTAN MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PAR MTHONG BA DES NI ‘GOG PA MNGON DU BYAS PA YIN NO,,

Anyone who sees that everything there is has gone entirely beyond all grief has brought about the end of suffering.


[453]
GANG GIS CHOS THAMS CAD SHIN TU MA SKYES PAR MTHONG BA DES NI LAM BSGOMS PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS NAS LAM DES LEN PA MED PAR MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ BAR GSUNGS TE,

And anyone who sees that no thing at all has ever in the least begun is practicing the path.

Which is to say, only those who see the path as nothing they can follow will be able to reach nirvana.


[454]
‘DIS NI BDEN BZHI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR MTHONG BA DES, ‘KHOR BA LAS GROL BAR BYED LA, BDEN ‘DZIN DANG MA BRAL BA’I LAM GYIS ‘KHOR BA LAS MI ‘DA’ BA SHIN TU GSAL BAR GSUNGS PAS,

The point being made is that people who see that the four truths cannot exist through any nature of their own are able to liberate themselves from the cycle of pain—meaning that the Buddha is very clearly stating that one cannot go beyond this cycle by using a path where one is still not free of the tendency to think that things are real.


[455]
BDEN BZHI MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG TZAM GYI LAM GYIS NYON MONGS KYI SA BON SPONG MI NUS PA DANG, DE SPONG BA LA YIN LUGS KYI DON RTOGS NAS SGOM PA DGOS PAR BSTAN NO,,

What the Buddha is teaching us here is that we will never be able to eliminate the seeds of negative thoughts only by using the path of impermanence & the rest of the 16 aspects of the four truths; rather, stopping these seeds requires that we follow a practice which involves perceiving the way things are.

	
[456]
‘DI RNAMS LEGS PAR MA PHYED NA NYAN THOS LA NYON MONGS SPONG BA’I LAM MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG TU SGOM PA TZAM LAS MED PAR BZUNG NAS, NYAN THOS ‘PHAGS PA DANG NYAN THOS DGRA BCOM PAS ‘PHAGS PA DANG DGRA BCOM GYI GO MI CHOD DO, ZHES ‘PHAGS [f. 38a] PA LA SKUR ‘DEBS KYI SDIG CHEN PO SOG LA,

Anyone who fails to make these kinds of distinctions successfully can begin to think that the only path that listeners have at their disposal for eliminating negative emotions is the practice of the 16 aspects of impermanence & the rest.  And then they can start thinking that realized beings who are listeners, and enemy destroyers who are listeners, aren’t really up to the standard of “real” realized beings and enemy destroyers.  And by thinking this, they collect the serious misdeed of denigrating a realized being.


[457]
DE LTAR SMRA BA LA BYANG SEMS KYI SDOM PA YOD NA, RTZA LTUNG YANG SKYED PA YIN TE, BSLAB BTUS LAS,

If a person who says this kind of thing has also previously taken bodhisattva vows, then in addition they commit a root downfall of these vows.  For in fact The Compendium describes this kind of thing as a root downfall, in the following words:


	[458]
,SLOB PA’I THEG PAS CHAGS LA SOGS,
,SPONG BAR ‘GYUR BA MIN ZHES ‘DZIN,
,PHA ROL DAG KYANG ‘DZIN ‘JUG DANG,
ZHES RTZA LTUNG DU GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is when a person holds the view
That one cannot eliminate desire & the rest
By following the way of the learners;

And when they try to convince
Others to hold this view as well.


[459]
DON ‘DI RDO RJE GCOD PA LAS KYANG GSAL BAR GSUNGS TE, RAB ‘BYOR ‘DI JI SNYAM DU SEMS, RGYUN DU ZHUGS PA ‘DI SNYAM DU BDAG GIS RGYUN DU ZHUGS PA’I ‘BRAS BU THOB BO SNYAM DU SEMS SAM,

This same point is also expressed, quite clearly, in the Diamond Cutter Sutra:

Now Subhuti, what do you think?  Do those who have entered the stream ever think to themselves, "Now I have attained the goal of entering the stream"?


[460]
RAB ‘BYOR GYIS GSOL PA, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS DE NI MA LAGS SO, ,DE CI’I SLAD DU ZHE NA, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS DE NI GANG LA YANG ZHUGS PA MA MCHIS PA’I SLAD DU STE, DES NA RGYUN DU ZHUGS PA ZHES BGYI’O, ZHES

And Subhuti respectfully replied,

O Conqueror, they do not.  And why is it so?  It is, o Conqueror, because it would be impossible for them to enter anything at all.  And this is precisely why we can call them a "stream enterer."


[461]
DANG, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS GAL TE RGYUN DU ZHUGS PA DE ‘DI SNYAM DU BDAG GIS RGYUN DU ZHUGS PA’I ‘BRAS BU THOB BO SNYAM DU SEMS PAR GYUR NA, DE NYID DE’I BDAG TU ‘DZIN PAR ‘GYUR BA LAGS SO, ,SEMS CAN DU ‘DZIN PA DANG, SROG TU ‘DZIN PA DANG, GANG ZAG TU ‘DZIN PAR ‘GYUR LAGS SO, ,ZHES GSUNGS SHING, ‘BRAS GNAS PHYI MA GSUM LA YANG DE BZHIN DU GSUNGS SO,,

We also see:

And if it happened, o Conqueror, that a stream-enterer were to think to themselves, "I have attained the goal of entering the stream," then they would begin to grasp to some self in it.  And they would begin to grasp to a living being, and to something that lives, and to a person.

And then we see the same thing repeated for attaining the latter three goals as well.


[462]
RGYUN ZHUGS KYI SA THOB MKHAN DANG, THOB BYA’I ‘BRAS BU LA BDEN PAR BZUNG NAS, BDAG GIS RGYUN ZHUGS THOB BO SNYAM DU SEMS NA, DE NYID DE’I BDAG TU ‘DZIN PAR [f. 38b] ‘GYUR RO, ZHES PAS NI GANG ZAG DANG ‘BRAS BU BDEN ‘DZIN GNYIS BDAG ‘DZIN DU GSUNGS PA’I DANG PO NI, GANG ZAG GI BDAG ‘DZIN DANG, GNYIS PA NI CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN NO,,

That is, suppose that someone holds that the person who attains the level of entering the stream—as well as the goal which they are attaining—are real; and with this state of mind thinks to themselves, “I have attained the goal of entering the stream.”  Someone like this would then be holding that this experience was itself.  The statement here that the tendency to hold that both the person and the goal are real is a form of holding that something is itself is describing, in the first case, the tendency to hold that the person is themselves; and in the second case, the tendency to hold that things are themselves.


[463]
RGYUN ZHUGS KYI SA BDEN PAR BZUNG NAS BDAG GIS ‘BRAS BU THOB BO SNYAM DU MI ‘DZIN PA NI, BDEN ‘DZIN GYI YUL SUN MA PHYUNG BA’I DBANG DU MDZAD PA YIN GYI, LHAN SKYES KYI ‘DZIN PA YANG MED PAR STON PA MIN NO, ,DES NI PHYI MA RNAMS KYANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Holding that the level of entering the stream is real, but not then holding to the idea that “I have attained the goal,” refers to a point where one has not yet demolished the object of the tendency to think that something is real; but it’s not that what is being described here is that one no longer possesses the inborn tendency to do the holding.  With this we can understand the latter cases as well.


[464]
LUNG ‘DI DBU MA RANG RGYUD PA KHA CIG GZHAN DU ‘CHAD KYANG, SHER ‘BYUNG BLO GROS KYIS NYAN RANG GI BYANG CHUB TU BGROD PA LA, STONG NYID RTOGS DGOS PA’I SHES BYED DU DRANGS PA LTAR LEGS SO,,

Certain members of the Independent group within the Middle Way school have interpreted this citation in a different way; but it is best if we interpret it as Prajnakara Mati does: he quotes it as verification for the idea that it is necessary to perceive emptiness in order to make the journey to the enlightenment of the listeners & self-made buddhas.


[465]
DE LTAR NA LUNG DE DAG GIS NI DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA DANG BRAL NA, ‘KHOR BA LAS MI GROL BA DANG, ‘KHOR BA LAS GROL BA LA LTA BA DE DGOS PAR GSAL BAR BSTAN LA, NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM PA ‘KHOR BA’I ‘CHING BA LAS MA GROL BA NI, MKHAS PA SU YANG MI ‘DOD CING MI ‘THAD PAS, NYAN RANG LA CHOS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA RTOGS PA YOD PAR GSAL BAR BSTAN NO,,

These citations then are clearly indicating that, so long as one still lacks the view of suchness, they cannot be liberated from the cycle of pain; and in order to achieve such a liberation, one must possess this view.  And since there is no sage anywhere who would ever agree to the idea that enemy destroyers who are listeners or self-made buddhas have not yet achieved liberation from the shackles of the cycle of suffering—and since it would be wrong in any case to do so—then what these citations are also indicating clearly is that these listeners & self-made buddhas do possess the realization that nothing exists through any nature of its own.


[466]
GZHAN YANG YUM CHEN MO SOGS KHUNGS MANG MOD KYANG, TSIG MANGS SU DOGS NAS MA BRIS SO,,

There are admittedly a great number of other authoritative sources for this concept—such as those found in the Great Mother—but I shall not write of them here, for I fear it would make my composition too lengthy.



Classical commentaries & sutras of the lower way
which prove the same point


[467]
GNYIS PA NI, RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,JI SRID PHUNG POR ‘DZIN YOD PA,
,DE SRID DE LA NGAR ‘DZIN NYID,
,NGAR ‘DZIN YOD NA YANG LAS TE,
,DE LAS [f. 39a] YANG NI SKYE BA YIN,

Here is our second step from above: presenting classical commentaries, and sutras of the lower way, which prove the point that listeners & self-made buddhas do possess the realization that things have no nature of their own.  The String of Precious Jewels puts it this way:

As long as one holds
To the parts of a person,
One will surely hold
To a “me.”

And as long as one holds
To a “me,”
One also has karma,
And from it in turn rebirth.


	[468]
,LAM GSUM THOG MTHA’ MED PA,
,’KHOR BA’I DKYIL ‘KHOR MGAL ME YI,
,DKYIL ‘KHOR LTA BU PHAN TSUN GYI,
,RGYU CAN ‘DI NI ‘KHOR BAR ‘GYUR,

These three patterns
Have no beginning,
Or end, or middle;

So the wheel of pain spins,
Like a spinning wheel of lights,

Each pattern triggered
By each of the others,
Creating a wheel of rebirth.


	[469]
,DE NI RANG GZHAN GNYIS KA DANG,
,DUS GSUM NYID DU’ANG MA THOB PHYIR,
,NGAR ‘DZIN PA NI ZAD PAR ‘GYUR,
,DE LAS LAS DANG SKYE BA YANG,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

But here there is no itself,
Nor something else or both,
Nor can anything reach
The now or then or going to be;

So the tendency
To hold to a “me”
Will end,

And then as well
Will karma,
And then will rebirth too.


[470]
DE’I RKANG PA DANG PO GNYIS KYIS NI PHUNG PO LA BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA JI SRID YOD PA DE SRID DU, DE LAS NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTA ‘BYUNG BAR BSTAN PAS, ‘JIG LTA MA LUS PAR ZAD PA LA PHUNG PO BDEN ‘DZIN ZAD DGOS PAR BSTAN TE, DE’I TSE NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM PAS KYANG PHUNG PO BDEN ‘DZIN ZAD PAR SPANGS PAR SHES SO,,

The very first part here, from “As long as one holds…” up to “…to a ‘me’,” is meant to indicate that—as long as one holds that the parts of a person are real—then one will be subject to the view of destruction that holds to a “me.”  And what this implies is that—if one wishes to finish off every form of the view of destruction—then one must finish off the tendency to hold that the parts of the person are real.  And we thus come to understand that at this point enemy destroyers who are listeners or self-made buddhas also eliminate the tendency to hold that the parts of the person are real.


[471]
DE LTAR NA BDEN ‘DZIN GYI ZHEN YUL SUN MA PHYUNG BAR DU, ‘JIG LTA’I ZHEN YUL SUN MI PHYIN PAS, THEG PA CHE CHUNG GI GRUB MTHA’ SMRA BA LA THUN MONG DU GRAGS PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED NI, RAGS PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG TZAM BKAG PA YIN GYI, PHRA BA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MIN PAR SHES SO,,

As such, we cannot demolish the object that the view of destruction thinks it sees, until we manage to demolish the object that the tendency to think that things are real thinks it sees.  And so you should understand that the version of the lack of a self-nature to the person which is generally understood to be held in common by those who follow the schools of the greater way and those who follow the schools of the lesser way is a denial of a self-nature to the person in no more than its gross form; and is not the subtle form of the lack of a self-nature to the person.


[472]
DE’I PHYIR SLOB DPON ‘DI’I LUGS KYIS NYAN RANG GIS GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED RTOGS TSUL, GRUB MTHA’ SMRA BA GZHAN DANG ‘DRA BA BZUNG NAS, CHOS KYI BDAG MED RTOGS PA YOD MED LA MI MTHUN PAR SMRA BAS NI, ‘DI’I LUGS LEGS PAR MA RTOGS PA YIN TE,

Therefore those who make contradictory statements about whether listeners & self-made buddhas perceive the lack of a self-nature to things—because they have interpreted this particular master’s presentation on how these two types of practitioners perceive the lack of a self-nature to the person in accordance with proponents of other schools—have in fact failed to grasp this presentation correctly.


[473]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA DANG BRAL BA LA GANG ZAG GI [f. 39b] BDAG MED PA RTOGS PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR BAR ‘GREL PA LAS GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And this is true because the Autocommentary states that anyone who lacks the view of suchness cannot be someone who perceives the lack of a self-nature to the person.


[474]
DE NAS RKANG PA GNYIS KYIS ‘JIG LTA YOD PAS DE’I DBANG GIS ‘KHOR BAR ‘CHING BA’I LAS SOG PA DANG, DE LAS LAS DBANG GIS ‘KHOR BAR SKYE BAR GSUNGS TE, 

The following lines of our citation—the ones that go from “And as long as…” up to “…in turn rebirth”—are saying that, because one then possesses the view of destruction, it will cause them to collect the kind of karma that fetters them to the cycle of pain; and because of this, one will be reborn into this cycle, through the power of karma.


[475]
DE YANG PHUNG PO LA BDEN ‘DZIN GYI ZHEN YUL SUN MA PHYIN PA’I DBANG DU MDZAD KYI, SPYIR ‘JIG LTA YOD TZAM LA MIN TE, SA BDUN PA’I BAR DU ‘JIG LTA YOD KYANG, SA DANG PO NAS LAS DBANG GIS SKYE BA MI LEN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This statement by the way is made with reference to someone who has failed to demolish the object that the tendency to hold that the parts to a person are real thinks it sees; it is not though a general reference only to anyone who possesses the view of destruction.  Up to the seventh bodhisattva level, we still possess this view; but from the first bodhisattva level on up, we no longer take rebirth through the power of karma.


[476]
GZHUNG DE DAG GIS NI DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA SGOM PA DANG BRAL NA, ‘JIG LTA ZAD PAR BYED MI NUS PAR BSTAN PAS, MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG GI LAM TZAM LAS MED NA NYON MONGS ZAD PAR SPONG BA MED PAR BSTAN NO,,

What these works are teaching us is that—so long as we lack a deep familiarity with the view of suchness—we will be unable to put an end to the view of destruction.  As such they are teaching us that there can be no final elimination of our negative thoughts so long as we possess nothing more than the path of impermanence & the rest of the 16 aspects.


[477]
DE LTAR THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED KYI ‘JOG TSUL MDZAD PHYIN CHAD, GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED THUN MONG BA TZAM GYI DBANG DU MDZAD NAS, ‘JIG LTA LA SOGS PA’I NGOS ‘DZIN MDZAD PA’I NYON MONGS KYI RNAM GZHAG RNAMS SOR BZHAG TU MDZAD NA, THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I GRUB MTHA’, MTHA’ MA CHOD PA’I NOR PA CHEN POR ‘GYUR BAS, DE LA MKHAS PA’I DBANG PO ‘DI ‘KHRUL BA GA LA SRID,

And so suppose we start with a thinker who was actually the one who set forth the way of defining the lack of a self-nature to the person in a way which was not shared by the different systems; and who supposedly then limited themselves to the shared concept of this particular lack of a self-nature; and who then set aside the presentation of the negative emotions which correctly identifies the view of destruction and so on; and thus made the stupendous error of failing to thresh out the views of this very unique school of thought…how could this Lord of All Sages ever possibly make such a mistake?


[478]
DES NA NYAN RANG LA CHOS KYI BDAG MED RTOGS PA YOD PAR BSHAD PA’I GZHUNG ‘DZUGS PAR SGOM ZHING, NYON MONGS KYI RNAM GZHAG LA THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I ‘JOG TSUL YOD DAM MED SNYAM PA TZAM YANG MI SKYE [f. 40a] BA’I ‘DI’I RJES ‘BRANG RNAMS NI, LUGS ‘DI LA DAD PA TZAM DU ZAD DO, ,’DIS MTSON NAS GZHAN YANG MANG DU SNANG BA RNAMS LEGS PAR RTZAD GCAD PAR BYA’O,,

So what we have here is a person who has failed to sit down and put in front of their mind the great classics which explain how listeners & self-made buddhas do possess the perception that there is no self-nature to things; and to whom it has never even occurred to examine whether or not there is a unique way of setting forth how the negative emotions work.  And then we have all of those who have followed this person, and who possess no more than a blind faith in our school.  And all these people are only one example that we have dealt with here; there appear to be many others like them, and you should learn to scrutinize their views carefully.


[479]
LAM GSUM NI NYON MONGS DANG LAS DANG SKYE BA’I KUN NYON GSUM MO, ,DE GSUM LA THOG MTHA’ DANG DBUS MED PA NI NYON MONGS LAS LAS DANG, DE LAS SDUG BSNGAL SKYE ZHING SDUG BSNGAL LAS KYANG DE’I RIGS ‘DRA DANG, NYON MONGS SOGS SKYE BA’I PHYIR PHAR SKYE TSUR SKYE BYED PAS, SNGA PHYI’I RIM PA NGES PA MED PA STE, PHAN TSUN GYI RGYU CAN GYI DON NO,,

The “three patterns” mentioned in our quotation, by the way, refer to the negative-emotion side of things, in the form of negative thoughts themselves; karma; and rebirth.  When we say that these three “have no beginning, or end, or middle,” what we are referring to is how there is no definite sequential order to them, for they trigger each other: that is, negative thoughts lead to karma, and then karma instigates suffering, and suffering in turn gives birth to more of the same, as well as negative emotions & the rest—so that all of the three are triggering each other.


[480]
RTEN ‘BREL DE NI RANG DANG GZHAN DANG GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA MED LA, DE YANG DUS GSUM GANG YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MA THOB PA STE MED PA MTHONG BA’AM, MA MTHONG BA’I PHYIR TE, RGYU MTSAN GYIS NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTA ZAD PAS ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHOR BA LDOG GO

But here in the system of dependent events there is no such thing as something which has come from itself, nor something which has come from something else, or else from both of these two.  Nor can anything reach any of the three times—being here now, or then in the past, or going to be in the future—which come into being through some nature of their own.  Here the expression “not reach” refers to the fact that we can see that such things cannot exist; or simply that we never see such things.  And it is only because of this fact that we can finish off the view of destruction which grasps onto some “me,” thus putting a stop to our spinning through this wheel of pain.


[481]
,DE’I ‘OG TU PHUNG KHAMS SOGS RANG BZHIN MED PAR GTAN LA PHAB PA’I MTHAR,
,DE LTAR YANG DAG JI BZHIN DU,
,’GRO BA DON MED SHES NAS NI,
,RGYU MED PA YI ME BZHIN DU,
,GNAS MED LEN MED MYA NGAN ‘DA’,
ZHES DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON MTHONG NAS MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ BAR GSUNGS SO,,

The following lines come further on in the same work, at the end of a section where things like the parts to a person and the categories are shown to lack any nature of their own:

And once they understand,
Purely and correctly,
That it is not the case
That anything can come—

That there is no such thing,
That it could never be held,

That it would be the same
As a fire that flamed
With nothing at all to cause it—
Then they reach nirvana.

What these lines are saying is that a person who sees the object of suchness will reach nirvana.


[482]
CI STE DE LTAR MTHONG BA DE BYANG SEMS KHO NA’I DBANG DU MDZAD NAS GSUNGS SO ZHE NA, DE LTAR GSUNGS PA DE NYAN RANG GI DBANG DU MDZAD NAS GSUNGS PA YIN TE, MYA NGAN [f. 40b] ‘DA’ ZHES PA’I MJUG THOGS NYID DU,

One may ask: “Is seeing things this way being described here with reference only to bodhisattvas?”  The answer is that in fact the reference here is to listeners & self-made buddhas, for we read lines such as the following just after the words “Then they reach nirvana”:


	[483]
,DE LTAR BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAS KYANG,
,MTHONG NAS BYANG CHUB NGES PAR ‘DOD,
,’ON KYANG DE NI SNYING RJE YIS,
,BYANG CHUB BAR DU SRID MTSAMS SBYOR,
ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We assert as well that bodhisattvas
Always reach their enlightenment
By seeing the very same thing,

Although up to the point where they
Attain enlightenment they may
Make the crossing into a new life,
Because of their compassion.


[484]
‘GREL PAR DRANGS PA’I RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA’I GZHUNG RNAMS NI SNGA ‘GYUR MI LEGS PAR ‘DUG GO

The selections from the text of the String of Precious Jewels quoted in the autocommentary are translations from the earlier period and are not the best.


[485]
,NYAN THOS LA BSTAN PA’I MDO LAS KYANG, NYAN THOS RNAMS KYI NYON MONGS PA’I SGRIB PA SPANG BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR,
,GZUGS NI DBU BA BRDOS PA ‘DRA,
,TSOR BA CHU YI CHU BUR ‘DRA,
,’DU SHES SMIG RGYU LTA BU STE,
,’DU BYED RNAMS NI CHU SHING BZHIN,
,RNAM PAR SHES PA SGYU MA LTAR,
,NYI MA’I GNYEN GYIS BKA’ STZAL TE,
ZHES DPE LNGAS ‘DUS BYAS RNAMS RANG BZHIN MED PAR DPYAD PA YIN NO,,

We further see, in sutras presented to listeners, an examination of how caused things lack any nature of their own; these presentations utilize five different similes to help listeners eliminate the negative-emotion obstacles:

The Friend of the Sun declared
That physical forms are like bubbles,
And feelings like the froth on a wave;

That the capacity to discriminate
Resembles a mirage;

That the other factors
Are like the hollow cane of sugar;

And consciousness like an illusion.


[486]
BYANG CHUB SEMS ‘GREL LAS, STON PAS NYAN THOS RNAMS LA PHUNG PO LNGA DANG, BYANG SEMS RNAMS LA GZUGS DBU BA SOGS LNGA DANG ‘DRA BAR BSHAD CES KHYAD PAR PHYE BA NI, RE ZHIG DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS MI NUS PA’I NYAN THOS LA DGONGS KYI NYAN THOS THAMS CAD LA MIN TE,

The Commentary on the Wish for Enlightenment makes a distinction between how the Teacher has taught the listeners the five parts to a person; while teaching the bodhisattvas how physical forms & the rest of the five are like a bubble and so on.  This statement though is intended to refer to listeners who for the time being are unable to perceive suchness; it is not meant to refer to all listeners.


[487]
DE NYID LAS, 
,GANG DAG STONG NYID MI SHES PA,
,DE DAG THAR PA RTEN MA YIN,
,’GRO DRUG SRID PA’I BTZON RAR NI,
,RMONGS PA DE DAG ‘KHOR BAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As this text itself states,

There can be no freedom at all
For those who cannot
Understand emptiness.

These in their dark ignorance
Will continue to spin in the prison
Of the six realms of existence.


[488]
THEG DMAN GYI SDE SNOD DU CHOS RANG BZHIN MED PA’I DON ‘DI NYID STON PAR MDZAD PA NA, RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS [f. 41a],

And it’s because this is in fact how the collection of scriptures in the lower way presents what it means for things to have no nature of their own that The String of Precious Jewels can say the following:


[489]
,THEG PA CHE LAS SKYE MED BSTAN,
,GZHAN GYI ZAD PA STONG PA NYID,
,ZAD DANG MI SKYE DON DU NI,
,GCIG PA DE PHYIR BZOD PAR GYIS,

The greater way teaches how things
Never start; while the others describe
Their end as emptiness.

Stopping and never starting
Refer to the very same thing;
Thus you must bear with it.


[490]
ZHES THEG CHEN GYI MDO SDE LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA STONG NYID DU BSTAN PA DANG, GZHAN TE THEG DMAN GYI MDO LAS NI STONG PA NYID STON PA NA, ‘DUS BYAS ZAD PAR BSTAN PAS STONG PA NYID STON PA GNYIS DON GCIG PAS, THEG CHEN LAS STONG NYID BSTAN PA LA MI BZOD PAR MA BYED CES GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that the collection of sutras of the greater way teaches that the fact that things never start through any nature of their own is emptiness; while when the “others”—referring to the sutras of the lower way—present emptiness, they do so by describing how caused things end.  These two though refer to the very same thing; and thus, says the text, you must be careful not to fail to bear with the way in which the higher way presents emptiness.


[491]
‘DI GNYIS DON GCIG LUGS LA KHA CIG NA RE, NYAN THOS PA RNAMS DNGOS PO LA ZAD PA KHAS LEN NA, RANG BZHIN YOD NA ZAD PA MI RIGS PAS, DE KHAS LEN NA DANG PO NAS RANG BZHIN MED PA KHAS LEN DGOS PAS DE GNYIS DON GCIG GO ZHES ‘CHAD PA NI,

On the question of just how these two refer to the same thing, some have given us the following explanation:

Given that the listeners accept that functional things do end, and given that—if something had any nature of its own—it would be illogical for it to end, then because of these givens we can say that listeners must from the very start accept that nothing has any nature of its own; and this then is what it means here when we say that “the two refer to the same thing.”


[492]
SHIN TU MI ‘THAD DE, DE LTA YIN NA DBU MA PAS YOD PAR ‘DOD PA’I MYU GU LA SOGS PA’I CHOS GANG KHAS LEN PA LA YANG, RGYU MTSAN DE YOD PAS MYU GU LA SOGS PA THAMS CAD DANG, STONG PA NYID GNYIS DON GCIG TU HA CANG THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

This position though is grossly mistaken.  If it’s the way you’ve described it, then we would be forced to accept the ridiculous implication that—because the very same reason applies to how those of the Middle Way school accept any particular object, such as the sprouts whose existence they believe in—then they would have to be saying that all objects, such as sprouts & the rest, are the same thing as emptiness itself.


[493]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA’I ‘GREL PAR SKYE BA MED PA DANG, SKAD CIG MA LA DON GYI KHYAD PAR ‘GA’ YANG MED DO, ZHES PA YANG GZHUNG DON MA GO BA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

And to say that the commentary to the String of Precious Jewels draws no distinction at all between the meaning of things never starting, and of things changing moment by moment, is also the explanation of a person who has no understanding of this classic.


[494]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA’I ‘GREL PAR DRANGS PA’I THEG DMAN GYI MDO LAS, GANG SDUG BSNGAL ‘DI MA LUS PAR SPANGS PA, NGES PAR [f. 41b] SPANGS PA, BYANG BAR GYUR PA, ZAD PA ‘DOD CHAGS DANG BRAL BA, ‘GOG PA, NYE BAR ZHI BA, NUB PA, SDUG BSNGAL GZHAN GYI MTSAMS MI SBYOR ZHING, MI ‘BYUNG MI SKYE BA ‘DI NI ZHI BA, ‘DI NI GYA NOM PA STE,

We see the following sutra of the lower way quoted in A Commentary to the “Sixty Verses on Reasoning”:

Anytime someone is able to eliminate every bit of this suffering; to rid themselves of it forever; to clean it away; to reach the end, free of all desire; to finish it; to put it to a final rest; to see it melt away; never to cross over into more of this suffering; never to see it come again, never to see it rise again—this then is peace, this then is beauty.


[495]
‘DI LTA STE PHUNG PO THAMS CAD NGES PAR SPANGS PA, SRID PA ZAD PA, ‘DOD CHAGS DANG BRAL BA, ‘GOG PA, MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA’O, ZHES GSUNGS LA,

In this way they have eliminated each & every part to the person; they have finished off this kind of existence; they are free of all desire; they have stopped; they have reached nirvana, beyond all grief.


[496]
DE’I DON ‘GREL BA NA SDUG BSNGAL ‘DI ZHES PA’I NYE BA’I TSIG GIS GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR, DA LTAR GYI RANG RGYUD KYI SDUG BSNGAL LAM PHUNG PO KHO NA’I DBANG DU MDZAD NAS, MA LUS PAR SPANGS PA NAS NUB PA’I BAR DANG, MA ‘ONGS PA’I SDUG BSNGAL GYI DBANG DU MDZAD NAS, SDUG BSNGAL GZHAN MTSAMS MI SBYOR BA NAS, MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA’O ZHES PA’I BAR DU GSUNGS SO,,

When this text interprets the sutra, it draws our attention to the demonstrative adjective of proximity: “this suffering,” saying that this phrase thus applies only to the suffering or parts of a person included within our own being, in the present time.  And then the description from “eliminating every bit of this suffering” up to “see it melt away” is said to apply to this present pain.  Next, the wording from “never to cross over into more of this suffering” up to “nirvana, beyond all grief” is said to apply to future pain.


[497]
SDUG BSNGAL LAM PHUNG PO ‘DI ZHES PA DE GNYIS KYI BYE BRAG NYON MONGS LA ‘JUG PA’I SPYI SGRA BYE BRAG LA ‘JUG PA’O SNYAM NA, DE YANG MI RUNG STE SPYI SGRA NI SPYI’I DON LA BSHAD DU MI RUNG NA, BYE BRAG LA BSHAD DGOS MOD KYANG, ‘DIR NI SPYI SGRA’I STENG NAS BSHAD DU YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now one might think to oneself that there is a case here where the general refers to the specific: that is, where the expression “this suffering or parts of a person” refers to the negative emotions which are a subcategory of both of these.  This though would be a mistake.  While it is true that the general term here cannot be explained as referring to the general category itself, and must be explained as referring to a subcategory, we should still adhere to an explanation referencing the general.


[498]
DE LTAR BYAS NA DNGOS POR SMRA BA RNAMS LTAR NA, RGYUD BLA MA LAS NYON MONGS GDOD NAS ZAD PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR PHUNG PO GDOD MA NAS RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PAS, GDOD MA NAS ZAD PA LA BSHAD DU MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR,

As such, when we are speaking from the viewpoint of the schools which accept the reality of function, it would be improper to follow the idea expressed in the section of The Higher Line which goes “…because the negative emotions have been finished off since forever”—that is, to say that the parts to a person are “finished off since forever” because, since forever, they have never started through any nature of their own.


[499]
LAM GYIS MA LUS PAR SPANGS PA LA BSHAD DGOS NA, DE’I TSE MNGON DU BYA RGYU’I MYANG ‘DAS YOD PA NA MNGON DU BYED MKHAN [f. 42a] MED PA DANG, BYED MKHAN YOD PA NA PHUNG PO MA ZAD PAS MNGON DU BYA RGYU’I MYANG ‘DAS MED PAR ‘GYUR BAS, MDO ‘DI BSHAD MI NUS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And so that would be wrong; but we would still be left with having to explain how it is that we use the path to “eliminate every bit.”  If at this point the thing we were trying to bring about—the nirvana—did exist, then the person who brought it about could not.  And if the person who brought it about did exist, then the nirvana that they were trying to bring about could not—since the parts of a person would still not have been finished off.  And then in this case we would be left unable to explain the wording of this sutra.


[500]
KHO BO CAG LTAR NA, ‘DI’I ZAD PA NI, ZAD PA GNYEN POS ZAD PA MA YIN TE, DE NI GDOD NAS ZAD PAS ZAD CES BYA, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR BSHAD PAS CHOG PAS MDO’I DON LEGS PAR BSHAD PAR NUS SO,,

The way we ourselves would explain the sutra would be to say that the “finishing off” here is not the kind of finishing off that you do by applying a particular spiritual antidote.  Rather, we would follow that kind of thinking which says “We say something is ‘finished off’ because it has been finished off since forever.”  It would be fine to do it this way, and this would leave us easily able to explain the meaning of this sutra, correctly.


[501]
DES NA MDO LAS ‘DI ‘DRA BA’I ZAD PA BSTAN NAS, SDUG BSNGAL ‘GAGS PA’I ‘GOG PA MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA BSTAN PA DE DANG, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA’I ‘GOG PA BSTAN PA GNYIS DON GCIG TU ‘PHAGS PAS GSUNGS PA ‘DI MA RTOGS PAR SNANG BAS ZHIB TU BSHAD DO,,

Given that the sutra has presented this kind of “finishing off,” we can say that it appears that people have failed to grasp this statement by the Realized One, where he explains how these two—presenting nirvana as a cessation where suffering has been stopped; and presenting a cessation which consists of the fact that nothing ever starts through any nature of its own—can be seen as amounting to the same thing.  And so this is why I have taken the time to go into such detail on this point.


[502]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,BCOM LDAN DNGOS DANG DNGOS MED PA,
,MKHYEN PAS KA TY’A YA NA YI,
,GDAMS NGAG LAS NI YOD PA DANG,
,MED PA GNYIS KA’ANG DGAG PA MDZAD,

Wisdom says as well:

The Conqueror sees
What is real and what is not;

And thus in the advices
Given to Katyayana

Denied both things existing
And not existing at all.


[503]
CES GSUNGS PA ‘DIS KYANG THEG DMAN GYI MDO LAS MTHA’ GNYIS BKAG PA GSUNGS PAR STON TE, MDO ‘DI NI LUNG PHRAN TSEGS NA SNANG NGO, ,DE DAG KYANG MTSON PA TZAM YIN GYI, RIN CHEN PHRENG BA NA ‘DIR MA DRANGS PA DU MA ZHIG DANG, RIGS PA DRUG CU PA DANG, BSTOD PA’I TSOGS LAS KYANG DU MA ZHIG GSUNGS SO,,

These lines are also expressing how sutras of the lower way state that both extremes should be denied—and this particular sutra citation appears in The Assorted Topics of the Word.  These are all just representative examples; there are many other supporting citations from the String of Precious Jewels that we have not quoted here—as well as many others from the Sixty Verses on Reasoning, and the Collection of Praises.



Refuting arguments covered
in the autocommentary

[504]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, ‘GREL PA NAS BSHAD PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA DANG, DER MA BSHAD PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O,,

With this we have reached our third topic from above: a refutation of arguments concerning the presentations we have cited which show that listeners & self-made buddhas do possess the realization that things have no nature of their own.  We proceed in two steps: the refutation of arguments covered in the autocommentary; and a refutation of arguments not covered there.


[505]
DANG PO NI, ‘GREL PA LAS, GANG ZHIG GAL TE NYAN THOS KYI [f. 42b] THEG PA LAS KYANG CHOS LA BDAG MED PA BSTAN NA, DE’I TSE THEG PA CHEN PO BSTAN PA DON MED PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM DU SEMS PA DE’I LUGS DE YANG ‘DI LTAR RIGS PA DANG LUNG DANG ‘GAL BAR RTOGS SO,,

Here is the first.  We see the following in the autocommentary:

Someone might think to themselves: “If it is the case that the lack of a self-nature to things is presented in the way of the listeners, then it becomes pointless to present it again in the greater way.”   You should understand though that this approach contradicts both logic & scriptural authority.


[506]
ZHES PA’I PHYOGS SNGA MA SMRA BA NI SLOB DPON LEGS LDAN YIN TE, SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS KYIS RAB BYED BDUN PA’I ‘GREL PAR THEG DMAN GYI MDOR CHOS THAMS CAD BDAG MED PAR GSUNGS PA’I DON, CHOS RNAMS NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PA’I DON DU BSHAD PA LA, SHES RAB SGRON MAR DE LTA YIN NA, THEG CHEN BSTAN PA DON MED DU ‘GYUR RO ZHES DGAG PA MDZAD DO,,

The person who expressed the first position found in this citation is Master Bhavaviveka.  Master Buddha Palita, in commenting upon the seventh section of Wisdom, had described the statement that the sutras of the lower way speak of how nothing has any nature of its own as referring to the way in which nothing exists through any unique quality of its own.  And then in his Lamp on Wisdom, Master Bhavaviveka tries to refute this position, saying that if this were the case, then the presentation found in the greater way would be pointless.


[507]
DE LA SPYIR THEG CHEN BSTAN PA DON MED DU ‘GYUR ZER RAM, THEG CHEN DU CHOS KYI BDAG MED BSTAN PA DON MED DU ‘GYUR ZER,

On this position we would ask: “Are you saying that the teachings of the greater way in general would be pointless, or are you saying that it would be pointless to present the lack of a self-nature to things in the greater way?”


[508]
DANG PO LTAR NA NI, THAL BA DE LA KHYAB PA YOD NA NI, THEG CHEN BSTAN PA CHOS LA BDAG MED PA TZAM ‘BA’ ZHIG STON PAR ‘GYUR NA, DE NI MA YIN TE 

Suppose you respond that the former is the case.  If then the relationship expressed in this statement of absurdity here always held true—and it were the case that only the lack of a self-nature to things were presented in the teachings of the greater way—we would have to respond that this is not at all the way things are.


[509]
THEG CHEN LAS NI, BYANG SEMS KYI SA RNAMS DANG, SBYIN PA LA SOGS PA’I PHAR PHYIN GYI SPYOD PA DANG, SMON LAM DANG BSNGO BA RLABS PO CHE RNAMS DANG, SNYING RJE CHEN PO SOGS DANG, TSOGS GNYIS RLABS PO CHE DANG, BYANG SEMS KYI MTHU RMAD DU BYUNG BA SO SKYE DANG, NYAN RANG GIS BSAM GYIS MI KHYAB PA’I CHOS NYID KYANG STON PA’I PHYIR TE,

And that’s because the following subjects are also presented there: the levels of the bodhisattva; the activities of giving and the other perfections; vast and effective forms of prayer & dedication; great compassion and the like; powerful ways of completing the two collections; and the extraordinary might of the bodhisattva, the very nature of things, inconceivable to beings who have yet to see emptiness, and to the listeners & self-made buddhas.


[510]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,NYAN THOS THEG PA DE LAS NI,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SMON LAM DANG,
,SPYOD PA YONGS BSNGO MA BSHAD DES,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAR GA LA ‘GYUR,

As the String of Precious Jewels puts it,

The prayers of the bodhisattva,
Their actions and their dedications,

Find no presentation
In the way of the listeners;

How then could they ever
Become bodhisattvas?


	[511]
,[f. 43a] BYANG CHUB SPYOD LA GNAS PA’I DON,
,MDO SDE LAS NI BKA’ MA STZAL,
,THEG PA CHE LAS BKA’ STZAL PA,
,DE PHYIR MKHAS PA RNAMS KYIS GZUNG,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What it means to live
The life of a bodhisattva

Is not something spoken
Within these sutras;

But it is in the greater way—
Keep these teachings then,
Sages among you.


[512]
‘DI NI THEG DMAN GYI SDE SNOD NAS BSHAD PA’I LAM NYID KYIS, SANGS RGYAS SU BGROD NUS PAS, THEG CHEN GZHAN MI DGOS SO SNYAM PA’I LOG RTOG SEL BA LA GSUNGS LA, KHYED LTAR NA THEG CHEN LAS CHOS KYI BDAG MED GSUNGS PAS THEG DMAN GYI GZHUNG NAS BSHAD PAS MI CHOG CES GSUNG DGOS PA LA, DE MA GSUNGS PAR RGYA CHE BA’I PHYOGS GZHAN GSUNGS SO ZHES PA’O,,

This statement was made to counter the idea that—since it is possible to travel to Buddhahood using nothing more than the path presented in the collection of scriptures of the lower way—then there must be no need for another, higher way.  It is saying that—if we follow your line of thinking—then we would have to say that, because the lack of a self-nature to things is spoken in the teachings of the greater way, then it would be disallowable to explain it in the scriptures of the lower way.  But even if it were not so spoken, the teachings on the widespread side of things still are.


[513]
GAL TE PHYOGS GNYIS PA LTAR NA NI DE LA YANG KHYAB PA MED DE, NYAN THOS KYI SDE SNOD LAS NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA MDOR BSDUS PA TZAM LAS MI STON LA, THEG CHEN LAS NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED SGO DU MA NAS SHIN TU RGYAS PAR STON PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Even according to the latter position expressed above, there is no certainty to your conclusion.  And that’s because the lack of a self-nature to things is presented in the scriptural collection of the listeners in no more than a cursory way, whereas in the greater way this lack of a self-nature is presented in an extremely detailed way, from many different angles.


[514]
DE YANG ‘PHAGS PA’I BZHED PA YIN TE, ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PAR BSTOD PA LAS,
,MTSAN MA MED PA MA RTOGS PAR,
,KHYOD KYIS THAR PA MED PAR GSUNGS,
,DE PHYIR KHYOD KYIS THEG CHEN LAS,
,DE NI TSANG BAR BSTAN PA LAGS,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This is also the position of the Arya, for in the Praise of the One Who Went Beyond the World he says,

You stated that—
Without grasping how things
Have no signs of their own—
There is no freedom.

And that is why,
In the greater way,
You taught this in its entirety.


[515]
DE’I RKANG PA DANG PO GNYIS KYIS MTSAN MED KYI DE KHO NA NYID MA RTOGS PAR NYON MONGS ZAD PA MED PAS THAR PA THOB PA MED PAR BSTAN NO,,

The part in this verse from “You stated that…” up to “…there is no freedom” is meant to convey the fact that—if one fails to perceive suchness, the lack of signs to things—then they cannot put an end to their negative emotions; and thus cannot achieve freedom.


[516]
KHYOD KYI ZHES SOGS KYIS THEG CHEN LAS MTSAN MED CHOS KYI BDAG MED TSANG BAR TE RDZOGS PAR BSTAN, [f. 43b] ZHES PAS THEG DMAN DU NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED RDZOGS PAR MA BSTAN PAR SHES SO,,

The part of the verse which includes “you taught” is saying that the lack of a self-nature to things—the lack of signs—is presented “in its entirety” (meaning “in a complete way”) in the teachings of the greater way.  We can understand from this statement that the lack of a self-nature to things is not presented in a complete way in the teachings of the lower way.


[517]
‘O NA DE PHYIR ZHES PA RDZOGS PAR BSTAN PA’I RGYU MTSAN DU ‘GRO TSUL JI LTAR YIN SNYAM NA, 

“Well now,” you may ask, “just how is it that ‘that is why’?  Just how is it that a reason for why these things were ‘taught in their entirety’ is given here?”


[518]
MTSAN MED MA RTOGS PAR NYON MONGS ZAD PA’I THAR PA MI ‘THOB PAS NA, NYAN THOS KYI THEG PAR YANG CHOS KYI BDAG MED BSTAN DGOS LA, DE LA THEG PA CHE CHUNG GI KHYAD PAR YANG DGOS PA DE’I PHYIR ZHES BSHAD DGOS SO,,

One cannot reach the freedom where the negative emotions are finished off unless they perceive how things have no signs.  Thus, the lack of a self-nature to things must necessarily be presented even in the way of the listeners.  But still there must exist a distinction between the higher & lower ways—and “that” then “is why”.  This is how the point should be explained.


[519]
DE DAG GIS NI SUN ‘BYIN PA’I THAL BA DANG, DES BZLOG PA ‘PHANGS PA GNYIS LA KHYAB BYED MA NGES PA’I SUN ‘BYIN LTAR SNANG DU BSTAN PA NI, RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL BA’O, ,LUNG DANG ‘GAL BA NI SNGAR MANG DU BSHAD ZIN TO,,

Saying that the pair of (1) the statement of necessity here which overthrows the other’s position and (2) the opposite which this implies are a false refutation due to the necessity failing to hold in every instance contradicts logic.  And we have already demonstrated, with many citations, that it contradicts scriptural authority.


[520]
‘O NA THEG PA CHE CHUNG GI SDE SNOD DU CHOS KYI BDAG MED RDZOGS PAR STON MI STON DANG, DE GNYIS KYI LAM DU’ANG CHOS KYI BDAG MED RDZOGS PAR SGOM MI SGOM SLOB DPON ‘DIS BSHAD PA’I DON GANG YIN SNYAM NA,

“What then is the point,” you may ask yourself, “for this master to go into an explanation of whether or not, in the scriptural collections of the greater & lesser ways, the lack of a self-nature to things is presented in its entirety; and whether or not, on the path of these two ways, one meditates—in a complete way—upon this same lack of a self-nature?”


[521]
DE NI THEG CHEN PA LA SHES BYA THAMS CAD RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR RTOGS PA YOD LA, NYAN RANG LA DE MED PAR SHES BYA PHYOGS GCIG PA ‘GA’ RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR RTOGS PA YOD CES PA NI,  GTAN MIN TE

It is not at all the case, as some have put it, that this presentation is meant to convey that those of the greater way possess a realization that no existing object exists through any nature of its own; whereas those of the ways of the listener and the self-made buddha lack this same realization—since they realize only that some portion of all the things there are exist through no nature of their own.


[522]
GZHI GRUB PA CIG GI STENG DU, CHOS KYI BDAG MED TSAD MAS GRUB PA CIG BYUNG NA, DE NAS GZHI GZHAN LA BDEN PAR YOD MED KYI DPYOD PA ZHUGS NA, RIGS PA SNGA MA LA BRTEN NAS BDEN MED DU RTOGS PAR NUS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And this is because—if one is able to establish, by using an accurate perception, that the lack of a self-nature to things is true with regard to any single existent thing—then when one engages in an examination of whether things exist in truth with regard to any other object, they will be able to perceive that in fact it does not exist in truth, simply by using the same reasoning that they have employed previously.


[523]
DBU MA PAR ‘DOD PA KHA CIG GIS DNGOS [f. 44a] PO BDEN GRUB KHEGS PA’I LUGS SU BYAS NAS, BDEN STONG BDEN GRUB TU ‘DOD PA DANG, KHA CIG GIS CHOS NYID SGRUB PA’ANG DBANG BA {%SGRUB PA RANG DBANG BA} BDEN GRUB TU ‘DOD PA’I

Now some people who consider themselves to be followers of the Middle Way school—thinking to use it as a way of denying that functional things could exist in truth—have expressed the opinion that this lack of real existence itself does exist in truth.  And others believe that the proof of the very nature of things is itself something which has its own inherent power: that it exists in truth.


[524]
SNGA MA NI, BDEN TSAD LEGS POR MA ZIN PAR RAGS PA CIG LAS MA KHEGS PAR ‘DUG PA’I SKYON DU SNANG LA, PHYI MA NI DNGOS PO BDEN PA BKAG PAR RLOM YANG, TSAD MAS KHEGS PAR MI SNANG GI DNGOS PO LA SKUR ‘DEBS KYI LTA BAR ‘DUG PAS, DE DAG GIS MA NGES PA MED DO,,

The former of these two positions would appear to have the problem that—because this person has failed to identify, correctly, the point at which something can be said to exist “in truth”—it refutes no more than a very gross version of some object.  Those who have put forth the latter position may entertain the delusion that they have managed to disprove that a functioning thing could exist in truth, but it would not appear that they have been able to do so with any accurate perception; rather, their position only serves to deny the existence of functioning things which do in fact exist.  As such, there is no doubt in our assessment of these positions.


[525]
DES NA THEG CHEN PAS NI RTZA SHE LAS GSUNGS PA BZHIN DU, GZHI GCIG BDEN MED DU SGRUB PA LA YANG, SGRUB BYED KYI RIGS PA MI ‘DRA BA MTHA’ YAS PAS BSGRUBS PAS, DE KHO NA NYID LA BLO SHIN TU RGYAS PAR ‘GYUR LA,

Thus it is that when, as described in Wisdom, those of the greater way undertake to prove that any single object is devoid of true existence, they do so by using a limitless number of proofs to make their point—and their minds are thereby made wide open towards suchness.


[526]
THEG DMAN LA NI RIGS PA MDOR BSDUS PA CIG GIS DE KHO NA NYID TSAD MAS GRUB NA, SNGA MA LTAR MI BYED PAS DE KHO NA NYID LA BLO RGYAS PA MED PAS RGYAS BSDUS DANG, BDAG MED SGOM PA RDZOGS MA RDZOGS SU GSUNGS SO,,

Those of the lower way, on the other hand, employ only abbreviated forms of reasoning to prove suchness with accurate perception.  Since they fail to do what those other ones do, they lack any broadening of their mind towards suchness.  Thus it is that pronouncements have been made about the relative detail of the two approaches; and whether or not one has meditated in a complete way upon the lack of a self-nature.


[527]
DE LTAR ‘ONG BA YANG NYAN RANG RNAMS NI, NYON MONGS TZAM SPONG BA’I PHYIR BRTZON PA YIN LA, DE LA NI DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON MDOR BSDUS PA DE TZAM ZHIG RTOGS PAS CHOG GO ,THEG CHEN PA SHES SGRIB SPONG BA LHUR LEN PAS, DE LA DE KHO NA NYID LA SHES RAB MCHED NAS BLO SHIN TU RGYAS PA CIG DGOS PA YIN NO,,

The reason this has come to be is that the listeners & self-made buddhas are making efforts towards nothing more than eliminating their negative emotions—and that may be done by perceiving the meaning of suchness in no more than but this abbreviated manner.  Those of the greater way, on the other hand, are striving to rid themselves of the obstacles to knowledge; as such, they must develop wisdom towards suchness which grows in an exponential way: they must make their minds wide open.



Refuting arguments not covered
in the autocommentary

[528]
GNYIS PA NI, ‘O NA MNGON RTOGS RGYAN LAS,
,GZUNG DON RTOG PA SPONG PHYIR DANG,
,’DZIN PA MI SPONG PHYIR [f. 44b] DANG NI,
,RTEN GYIS BSE RU LTA BU’I LAM,
,YANG DAG BSDUS PAR SHES PAR BYA,
ZHES RANG RGYAL GYI LAM GYIS GZUNG BA LA BDEN ZHEN GYI RTOG PA SPONG NUS KYANG, ‘DZIN PA LA BDEN ZHEN SPONG MI NUS PAR GSUNGS PA DANG,

This brings us to our second step from above: a refutation of arguments not covered in the autocommentary.  “How then can it be correct,” one may ask, “that in the Jewel of Realizations it says that, by using the path of the self-made buddhas, one can rid oneself of the idea where we imagine that objects held by the mind could exist in truth; but at the same time are unable to rid ourselves of the idea that the states of mind which hold onto objects exist in truth?  For that work does say,

The path of those like a rhinoceros
Is known as ‘the path
Which is perfectly combined,’

Because one rids oneself
Of wrong ideas of the object held;

But not wrong ideas
About what holds them;

And because of the person
Who follows it.


[529]
YANG
,NYON MONGS SHES BYA LAM GSUM GYI,
,NYAMS PHYIR SLOB MA BSE RU DANG,
,RGYAL SRAS RNAMS KYI DAG PA STE,
ZHES GZUNG BA LA BDEN ZHEN SHES SGRIB TU GSUNGS PA JI LTAR DRANG ZHE NA,

“And what of the part in the same text where it states that a belief that objects held by the mind exist in truth is an obstacle to knowledge?  For it says—

Those of the negative emotions
And of the objects of knowledge

Wither away through the use
Of three different paths;

Therefore the purity
Of students who are rhinoceroses

And those who are children
Of the Buddhas…”


[530]
DE LA GZUNG BA PHYI ROL LA ZHEN PA SPONG BA’I DON NI, PHYI ROL GYI DON TSAD MAS GRUB KYANG, PHYI ROL BDEN GRUB RIGS PAS KHEGS PA DBU MA PA LTAR GTAN LA PHAB PA’I DON BSGOMS NAS BDEN ZHEN SPONG BA DANG,

What does it mean then when we say that a person has “rid oneself of a belief in objects of the mind—outer objects”?  It could mean that we have meditated upon the way as those of the Middle Way school describe it—showing how, although outer objects are confirmed by accurate perception, the idea that outer objects could exist in truth is disproved by reasoning—and through this meditation we have been able to rid ourselves of this particular belief that a thing could exist in truth.


[531]
YANG NA SEMS TZAM PA LTAR PHYI ROL GYI DON RIGS PAS BKAG PA’I DON BSGOMS PA LA BRTEN NAS, PHYI ROL YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA SPONG BA GANG RUNG GCIG LAS MI ‘DA’O,,

Or else it could mean that one has meditated on the point as the Mind Only school explains it—using logic to deny the existence of outer objects—and through this meditation has rid oneself of the belief that outer objects even exist.  It has to mean one of these two; there is no other choice.


[532]
DE LA DANG PO LTAR NA NI MI RIGS TE, PHYI DON SPYIR YOD PAR ‘JOG THUB PA LA, BDEN YOD DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PAS KHEGS PA CIG YIN NA NI, 

And yet the first option is incorrect.  That is, suppose a person were someone who was able to establish that, in general, outer objects do exist; and at the same time were someone who had managed to disprove—through the use of reasoning which examined the meaning of suchness—the idea that they could exist in truth.


[533]
DE NAS ‘DZIN PA LA BDEN PA YOD MED KYI DPYOD PA ZHUGS PA NA, RIGS PA SNGA MA’I MTHU LA BRTEN NAS BDEN MED DU RTOGS PAR NUS TE,

When this person subsequently undertook to examine whether the state of mind that holds to objects exists in truth or not, they would be able to realize that in fact it does not exist in truth, based simply on the power of their previous reasoning.


[534]
‘PHAGS PA LHAS,
,GANG GIS DNGOS GCIG DE BZHIN NYID MTHONG BA,
,DE YIS DNGOS KUN DE BZHIN NYID DU MTHONG,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This in turn is established by the words of Master Aryadeva:

Anyone who sees
That any single object
Exists in just that way

Also sees
That all the objects there are
Exist in just that way.


[535]
GNYIS PA LTAR ‘DOD PA NI SLOB DPON SENG GE BZANG PO LA SOGS PA’I ‘GREL PA’I LUGS YIN [f. 45a] PAS, DE’I LTAR NA PHYI ROL MED PAR TSAD MAS GRUB PA YIN NO,,

Accepting the second option is what we see done in the commentarial tradition of Master Haribhadra and others; and in this case then, it would be established through accurate perception that there are no outer objects.


[536]
PHYI ROL MED PAR GRUB NA DE ‘DZIN PA’I SHES PA, GZUNG BA LAS RDZAS THA DAD PA MED PAR NI, SU DBANG PO RTUL YANG ‘GRUB PAS,

Once a person has established that there are no outer objects, then they can figure out—regardless of how dull they might be—that the state of mind holding to an object cannot be substantially separate from the object being held.


[537]
‘DZIN PA LA BDEN ZHEN MI SPONG BA NI, SPYIR SHES PA BDEN GRUB TU KHAS LEN PA LA BYED KYI, GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD KYI PHYED KHEGS SHING PHYED BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA GTAN MIN PAS,

And so when we say that someone has yet to rid themselves—with respect to the state of mind holding to an object—of the belief that it exists in truth, what we are referring to is someone who accepts the idea that the mind could exist in truth.  It is not at all as if they deny half of the idea that subjects & objects could be separate from each other, and believe that the rest exists in truth.


[538]
‘DZIN PA BDEN PAR SMRA BA’I RANG RGYAL DANG, GZUNG ‘DZIN GNYIS MED KYI SHES PA DON DAM DU GRUB PAR SMRA BA’I RNAM RIG PA GNYIS GRUB MTHA’ MTSUNGS PA MTSAR ZHES PA NI, GSAL BYED PA’I BZHAD GAD DO,,

Thus they are having an illuminating laugh when they say, “Isn’t it weird that self-made buddhas who say that the state of mind holding to an object exists in truth; and those that believe everything is the mind who go on to say that the perception that objects and subjects are no two things exists in an ultimate way, are actually sharing the very same school of thought?”


[539]
‘DIR RANG RGYAL GYI LAM THEG PA ‘BRING DU STON PA LA, GZUNG BA DANG ‘DZIN PA LA BDEN ZHEN SPONG MI SPONG GI KHYAD PAR GSUNGS TE, DE GNYIS KYIS NYAN THOS LAS LHAG PA DANG, THEG CHEN LAS DMAN PA’I PHYIR ‘BRING PO’O,,

Here the path of a self-made buddha is said to be a “medium” way, and a distinction is described between whether or not they have rid themselves of the tendency to believe that the objects which are held by the mind, and the state of mind which holds to those objects, exist in truth.  In these two respects, they are higher than the listeners, but lower than those of the greater way—and so they are called “medium.”


[540]
‘DI NI THEG PA CHE ‘BRING CHUNG GSUM GYI GANG ZAG GSUM, DBANG PO RNO ‘BRING RTUL BA YIN PAS, BDAG MED LA LTOS TE DBANG PO’I RIM PA BZHAG PA STE, THEG CHEN LA LTA BA RAB DBU MA’I LTA BA DANG, THEG ‘BRING LA LTA BA ‘BRING SEMS TZAM GYI LTA BA DANG, THEG CHUNG LA LTA BA THA MA GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED THUN MONG BA’I LTA BA BZHAG PA YIN KYANG, DER MA NGES SO,,

These are the three types of practitioners, of the ways which are greater, medium, and lesser; and their intellectual capacities are sharp, middling, and dull.  Thus with the presentation where they say that the different levels of ones faculties are decided upon the basis of the lack of a self-nature—where those of the higher way are said to have the best viewpoint, the viewpoint of the Middle Way school; and those of the medium way are said to have a middling viewpoint, the viewpoint of the Mind Only school; and those of the lesser way are said to have very lowest viewpoint, a viewpoint held in common about how the person has no self-nature—there is no certainty that this is the case.


[541]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA GSUM GA LA YOD PA LTAR NA’ANG, DE KHO NA NYID MYUR DU GTING DPOGS MI DPOGS SOGS KYI [f. 45b] SGO NAS DBANG PO’I RIM PA GSUM MI ‘GAL LO,,

The fact is that—despite it being the case that all three possess the view of suchness—there is no contradiction to saying that there are three different degrees of intelligence, based upon distinctions such as whether or not they get to the bottom of suchness quickly.


[542]
‘DZIN PA SHES PA LA BDEN ZHEN SPONG MI NUS PA DMAN KHYAD DU BSTAN PA’I PHYIR, MNGON RTOGS RGYAN NAS BSHAD PA’I BDAG MED KYI LTA BA NI MDO RGYAN DANG, ‘BYED RNAM PA GNYIS LTAR SEMS TZAM LA BSHAD DU MI RUNG NGO,,

Given that the Jewel of Realizations expressly presents the inability to rid oneself of a belief that what holds onto things—the consciousness—exists in truth as a lower viewpoint, it is incorrect to say that this text, like the Jewel of the Sutras and the two books of “distinguishing,” should be described as a work of the Mind Only school.


[543]
MNGON RTOGS RGYAN LA’ANG DBU SEMS SU ‘GREL TSUL RGYA GAR BA RNAMS LA’ANG YOD PAS, DE DAG GI RGYU MTSAN MANG DU BSHAD DGOS KYANG, TSIG MANGS SU DOGS NAS RE ZHIG MA BRIS SO,,

The Jewel of Realizations has also been explained by different Indians as belonging to either the Middle Way school or the Mind Only school; there is certainly a need to explain the many reasons for this, but I shall not cover that point here, since I fear that the book would go on for too long.


[544]
YANG,
,CHOS KYI DBYINGS LA DBYER MED PHYIR,
,RIGS NI THA DAD RUNG MA YIN,
,BRTEN PA’I CHOS KYI BYE BRAG GIS,
,DE YI DBYE BA YONGS SU BRJOD,
CES GSUNGS PA ‘DIS NI NYAN RANG RNAMS LA’ANG CHOS NYID RTOGS PA YOD PAR BSTAN NO,,

Moreover, we read that:

Because the sphere of reality
Cannot be divided up,

It would be incorrect to say
That there are different family qualities.

And yet the division between them
Is only described

According to the things
Which rely upon them.

These lines are saying that listeners too can possess a realization of the way things are.  


[545]
DE LA CHOS KYI DBYINGS ZHES PA NI NYI KHRI SNANG BA LAS, DE LA RTOG PA DANG RNAM PAR RTOG PA NI DNGOS PO DANG DE’I MTSAN MA LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PA STE, DE MED PA’I PHYIR CHAGS PA MED PA NYID DU RIG PAR BYA’O, ,YOD PAR MA GYUR PA NYID NI CHOS THAMS CAD KYI DE BZHIN NYID DO,,

As for this expression, “sphere of reality,” we see it explained in the Illumination of the Twenty Thousand:

When we talk about “thinking that something is there” or “imagining that something is there,” we’re referring to a belief in things, and the indicators of things.  And you should understand that—since these don’t even exist—the attachment to them doesn’t really exist either.  The ultimate nature of things is in fact nothing other than this same quality, of not even existing.


[546]
DES NA ‘DIS NI CHOS KYI DBYINGS NYID ‘PHAGS PA’I CHOS RNAMS KYI RGYU YIN PA’I PHYIR, ,RANG BZHIN DU GNAS PA’I RIGS SGRUB PA’I RTEN YIN NO ZHES STON PAR BYED DO,

Thus it has been taught that—because this sphere of reality is in fact the cause of the qualities of a realized being—the family quality that exists in all beings by nature is the foundation of all Buddhist practice.


[547]
ZHES DNGOS PO DANG DE’I MTSAN MA LA BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I CHAGS PAS BZUNG BA LTAR YOD PA MIN PA’I BDEN STONG LA BSHAD DO,,

These lines are describing the “sphere of reality” as the quality of being empty of any true existence, in the sense of something’s not existing in the way that it is held to exist by the kind of attachment which believes that things and their indicators exist in truth.


[548]
DE LA CHOS DBYINGS RIGS YIN NA, SEMS CAN THAMS [f. 46a] CAD RIGS LA GNAS PAR ‘GYUR TE, CHOS DBYINGS NI THAMS CAD LA SPYIR GNAS PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES PA’I RTZOD PA BKOD DE, RIGS LA GNAS PA NI LAM GYI SKABS KYI RIGS LA BSAMS PA’O,,

If the sphere of reality here is the family quality, the argument thus goes, then all living beings reside in this quality—for the sphere of reality resides in all of them, as a general characteristic.  And when they speak of “residing in the family quality” here, what they have in mind is the family quality as it is present while one is still traveling the path.


[549]
DE’I LAN DU, JI LTAR DMIGS PA NA ‘PHAGS PA’I CHOS RNAMS KYI RGYUR ‘GYUR BA DE LTAR RIGS YIN PAR BRJOD PA DES NA, ‘DIR HA CANG THAL BA MED PAR GSUNGS TE, CHOS NYID YOD PA TZAM GYIS LAM GYI SKABS KYI RIGS LA GNAS PA MIN GYI, CHOS NYID LA LAM GYIS DMIGS NAS BSGOMS PA NA, ‘PHAGS CHOS KYI RGYU KHYAD PAR CAN DU GYUR PA’I TSE, RIGS KHYAD PAR CAN DU ‘JOG PA’I DON NO,,

In response, we might point out that—since you are here referring to something as the “family quality” insofar as, when one focuses upon it, that becomes a cause for the qualities of a realized being—then we would have to say that this is no great thing.  This is because we don’t say that—while they are still on the path—a person is considered to be residing in the family quality simply because they possess the very nature of things.  Rather, the point is that—when one uses the path to focus on this nature of things, and then meditates upon it—then this becomes an exceptional cause for the qualities of a realized being: they are talking about how we define something as an extraordinary form of the family quality.


[550]
DE LTA NA’ANG CHOS DBYINGS LA DBYE BA MED PAS THEG PA GSUM GYI RIGS NI THA DAD MI RUNG NGO ZHES PA’I LAN DU, BRTEN PA’I CHOS DMIGS BYED KYI LAM GYI DBYE BAS RIGS THA DAD DU BRJOD DO, ,ZHES STON NO,,

“If that’s the case,” one might say, “then—because the sphere of reality cannot be divided up into different versions—it would be incorrect to say that there are different family qualities, corresponding to the three different ways.”  In response we would say that, nonetheless, it is appropriate to divide the family quality into different types, according to the divisions of the things which rely upon them; that is, the paths which focus upon them.  This then is what’s being described [in the verse from the Jewel of Realizations].


[551]
RTEN NI ‘DIR DMIGS PA DANG, BRTEN PA NI DMIGS BYED YIN LA, DMIGS BYED LA NYAN RANG GI THEG PA GNYIS KYANG YOD CING, CHOS NYID LA DMIGS PA LA DE BLO NGOR ‘GRUB DGOS LA, BDEN GRUB BLO NGOR MA BCAD PAR, BDEN STONG BLO NGOR MI ‘GRUB CING, DE MA GRUB NA CHOS NYID BLO NGOR MI ‘GRUB BO,,

The thing being relied upon here is the object of the perception; while what relies upon it is the state of mind doing the perceiving—and the mind doing the perceiving can also include the minds of those who belong to the two ways of the listener or the self-made buddha.  And to say that one is perceiving the way things are, this way must have presented itself to the mind.  Yet if one has yet to exclude the idea that things exist in truth from presenting itself to the mind, the idea that things are void of existing in truth cannot present itself—and so long as it does not, then the way things really are cannot.


[552]
DE YANG DANG POR GZHI CHOS CAN GCIG GI STENG DU NGES DGOS PAS, NYAN RANG LA YANG PHYI NANG GI CHOS CAN LA DMIGS NAS, DE’I CHOS [f. 46b] NYID BDEN PAR MED PAR DMIGS PA YOD PAR BSTAN NO,,

This way that things really are, in turn, must be confirmed first with regard to some one particular object, or instance.  That being the case, what’s being indicated here is that listeners & self-made buddhas also first focus upon different outer & inner instances of things, and then perceive that their real nature is to lack any real existence.


[553]
DE LTAR BYAS NA RANG RGYAL LA DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON RTOGS PA CIG KYANG YOD PAS, RANG RGYAL LA SHES PA LA BDEN ZHEN SPONG MI NUS PAS MA KHYAB BO,,

Given all this, we can also say that there does exist the possibility of a self-made buddha who realizes the meaning of suchness; and that therefore it is not necessarily the case that a self-made buddha is incapable of ridding themselves of the belief that the mind exists in truth.


[554]
NYAN THOS LA YANG DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA DANG MA RTOGS PA GNYIS SU DBYE DGOS PA’I PHYIR, MNGON RTOGS RGYAN DU YANG THEG DMAN LA TSUL GNYIS GSUNGS PAS, GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD DU BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA LA, SHES SGRIB TU ‘JOG MI ‘JOG GNYIS NGES PAR BYA DGOS SO,,

And since we must as well divide listeners into two types of those who have realized suchness and those who have not, we must—given further that the Jewel of Realizations divides the lower way into two systems—say that the tendency to hold that objects & subjects exist in truth, as substantially separate, can either be described as an obstacle to omniscience, or not.


[555]
GAL TE THEG PA GSUM GYI RIGS THA DAD PA MI RUNG NGO ZHES MI RTZOD KYI, RIGS BCU GSUM GYI DBYE BA MI RUNG BAR RTZOD PA YIN SNYAM NA’ANG MI ‘THAD DE,

And if you think to yourself that the argument here is not that it is incorrect to say that there are different family qualities for the three ways—but rather that it is incorrect to say that the family qualities can be divided into 13 different types—then you are also mistaken.


[556]
NYI KHRI SNANG BAR JI SKAD DU ‘JAM DPAL GAL TE CHOS KYI DBYINGS GCIG DANG, DE BZHIN NYID GCIG DANG, YANG DAG PA’I MTHA’ GCIG YIN NA, DE LA JI LTAR SNOD DANG SNOD MA YIN PAR GDAGS SO ZHES GSUNGS PA BZHIN NO ZHE NA,

This is because the Illumination of the Twenty Thousand itself includes the lines:

Suppose one says that it’s similar to the statement: “O Gentle Voice, given that the sphere of reality is one; and that the ultimate nature of things is one; and that the ultimate end of things is one; then how can someone imagine that there are some people who are worthy vessels, and others who are not?”


[557]
ZHES MDO GZHAN LAS CHOS DBYINGS LA DBYE BA MED PAS, THEG CHEN GYI SNOD DANG SNOD MA YIN PAR JI LTAR BRTAG CES GSUNGS PA DANG ‘DI ‘DRA BAS, THEG PA CHE CHUNG GI RIGS THA DAD PA MI RUNG BA LA RTZOD RGYU YIN GYI, RIGS BCU GSUM LA BYAS NA SNOD DANG SNOD MA YIN PAR RTZOD PA MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here, our point is being compared to one in a separate work, a sutra, which asks the question: “Given that there are no separate versions of the sphere of reality, how then can one imagine that there are some people who are worthy vessels for the greater way, and other people who are not?”  The argument here is about the question of it not being correct to say that there separate versions of the family quality for those belonging to the greater or lesser ways; it wouldn’t be correct to argue about people being worthy vessels or not after distinguishing 13 types of family quality.


[558]
SLOB DPON CHEN PO SENG GE BZANG PO YANG ‘PHAGS PA GROL SDE DANG MTHUN PAR BZHED DO, ,DE BZHIN DU RGYUD BLA MA RTZA ‘GREL LAS KYANG, NYAN RANG LA CHOS NYID RTOGS PA DANG MA RTOGS PA GNYIS KA GSUNGS [f. 47a] PA YOD DE MANGS PAS ‘JIGS NAS RE ZHIG MA BRIS SO,,

The great master Haribhadra takes the same position as the realized being Vimuktasena.  And the root text & commentary of the Higher Line also say that listeners & self-made buddhas include some who have realized the real nature of things and some who have not—it is only out of a concern that I might go on too long that I do not write more on that, for the present.


[559]
DE LTAR GNYIS ‘ONG BA NI MNGON RTOGS RGYAN DU NYAN RANG GI LAM SHES PA’I LAM SHES STON PA NI, NYAN RANG GI RIGS CAN RNAMS RJES SU ‘DZIN PA’I PHYIR DU YIN PAS, RJES SU GZUNG RGYU’I THEG DMAN LA YANG ZAB MO’I SNOD DU GYUR MA GYUR GNYIS YOD CING, DE GNYIS LA’ANG PHYI MA CHE MANG BAS PHAL CHER DE’I LAM MANG DU GSUNGS SO,,

The fact that we see these two types relates to the fact that, in the Jewel of Realizations, the presentation of the knowledge of the path—where the listeners & self-made buddhas each know their own path—is something made in order to attract persons who fall into either the listener type or the self-made buddha type.  As such, we can say that—among those of the lower way that the presentation is trying to attract—there are two types: those who are worthy vessels for the profound, and those who are not.  And among these two types, the latter is by far more numerous; thus it is that for the most part, the path meant for them is spoken of more frequently.


[560]
THEG CHEN LA THOG MAR SEMS TZAM LA MA KHRID PAR DBU MA’I LTA BA MI RNYED PA SNANG BA BZHIN DU, RANG RGYAL LA YANG YOD LA DE NI NYAN THOS LA’ANG YOD PAR MNGON NO,,

It would seem that there are people belonging to the greater way who must be guided through the ideas of the Mind Only school before they are able to find the viewpoint of the Middle Way school; it would appear that there is a similar process for the self-made buddhas, and for the listeners as well.


[561]
GZHAN YANG NYI KHRI SNANG BA DANG, BRGYAD STONG ‘GREL CHEN GNYIS KAR CHOS DBYINGS THEG PA GSUM GA’I RIGS SU ‘JOG PA’I SHES BYED DU, ‘PHAGS PA’I GANG ZAG THAMS CAD NI, ‘DUS MA BYAS KYIS RAB TU PHYE BAR GSUNGS PA DRANGS LA,

Moreover, both the Illumination of the Twenty Thousand and the Great Commentary to the Eight Thousand cite—in support of the idea that the sphere of reality is the family quality for all three ways—the statement in scripture that “all those people who are realized beings are distinguished by something which is unproduced.”


[562]
DE NI RDO RJE GCOD PA LAS SANGS RGYAS PA’I CHOS DANG, DES BSTAN PA’I CHOS THAMS CAD MA MCHIS SO, ZHES PA’I SGRUB BYED DU ‘PHAGS PA’I GANG ZAG RNAMS NI ‘DUS MA BYAS KYIS RAB TU PHYE BA’I SLAD DU’O,

This statement recalls the mention in the Diamond Cutter Sutra that it is impossible for there to be any such thing as a being who becomes enlightened; and for there to be any such thing as the teaching which this being gives.  And in support of this idea, it is then stated that people who are realized beings are distinguished by something which is unproduced.


[563]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NI THEG PA CHE CHUNG GI ‘PHAGS PA’I GANG ZAG THAMS CAD NI CHOS RNAMS DE KHO NAR MA GRUB PA’I DON DAM ‘DUS MA BYAS MNGON DU BYAS PAS BZHAG PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’O,,

The point being made in these words is that all realized beings—whether they belong to the greater way or the lesser—are established as what they are by actualizing the ultimate unproduced thing: the fact that nothing in the universe is only what it is.


[564]
DE’I PHYIR LUGS ‘DI DANG MNGON RTOGS RGYAN GNYIS ‘GAL BA MA YIN NO,,
DES NA RGYAN GYI ‘GREL MDZAD DE DAG GI [f. 47b] LUGS LA YANG TSUL GNYIS SHES PAR BYA’O, SPROS PAS CHOG GO ,

Thus it is that the system we are presenting here is not one which is inconsistent with the teachings of the Jewel of Realizations.  And thus too you should understand that there are two different ways expressed in the systems of commentators to the Jewel.  Much more could be said about all of this. 



How a person practices giving
at the first bodhisattva level

[565]
GSUM PA LA BZHI, SA DANG PO LA GNAS PA’I SBYIN PA BSHAD PA, RTEN DMAN PA RNAMS KYI SBYIN PA BSHAD PA, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS KYI SBYIN PA BSHAD PA, SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN GYI DBYE BA BSTAN PA’O,,

With this we have come to our third section from above, which is a description of the high quality where we bring our practice to a higher level.  We will proceed in four steps: an explanation of the giving practiced by a person who is at the first level; an explanation of the giving practiced by people of a lower type of being; an explanation of the giving practiced by bodhisattvas; and a presentation of the divisions of the perfection of giving.


	[566]
[I.9]
Tadādhikaṃ tasya hi dānam eva
Sambuddha bodheḥ prathamaṃ nidānam,		
Adṛśya dṛṣṭau ca nimitta bhūtaṃ
sva māṃsa dāne’pi kṛtādarasya.

[I.9a]
,DE TSE DE LA RDZOGS SANGS BYANG CHUB RGYU,
,DANG PO SBYIN PA NYID NI LHAG PAR ‘GYUR,

At this point,
It is none other than giving,
The first of the causes
Of total enlightenment,
Which becomes higher for them.


[567]
DANG PO NI, SA RAB TU DGA’ BA THOB PA DE’I TSE BYANG SEMS DE LA PHAR PHYIN BCU’I NANG NAS SBYIN PA’I PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA NYID DE KHO NA, CHOS LHAG PAR YOD PAR ‘GYUR TE, DE LA PHAR PHYIN GZHAN RNAMS MED PA NI MIN NO,,

Here is the first.  At this point—that is, when the bodhisattva achieves the level called “Perfect Happiness”—it is only the perfection of giving (from among all the ten perfections) which is a practice which becomes higher for them.  It is not though that they lack all the other perfections.


[568]
‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN DE YANG RDZOGS PA’I BYANG CHUB KYI RGYU DANG PO STE, DE YANG ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’O,,

And it is the perfection giving that transcends the mortal world which is the first of the causes of total enlightenment—and this refers too to those that transcend the mortal world.


[569]
SPYIR PHAR PHYIN SNGA MA RNAMS LAS PHYI MA RNAMS LHAG PA YIN KYANG, SA ‘DIR SBYIN PA LHAG PAR GSUNGS PA NI, SA ‘DIR SBYIN PA NYAMS SU LEN PA LA MTHU PHUL DU BYUNG BA DE’I TSOD TZAM TSUL KHRIMS LA SOGS PA NYAMS SU LEN PA LA MED PA’I DON TE,

As a general rule, each of the perfections is higher than the one preceding it in the list; but saying that giving at this particular level is higher is only meant to indicate that—at this level—ones practice of an ethical way of life and the other perfections is not as incredibly powerful as the way one puts giving into practice.


[570]
SA DANG POR BDAG GI LUS DANG, PHYI’I YO BYAD GTONG BA LA SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN DANG ‘GAL BA’I KUN ‘DZIN GYI CHAGS PA CUNG ZAD KYANG MI ‘BYUNG BAR GSUNGS PA LTAR SPYOD NUS KYANG, SA GNYIS PAR RMI LAM NA YANG TSUL KHRIMS KYI MI MTHUN PHYOGS ‘CHAL KHRIMS LA GTAN MI SPYOD PA LTAR MI NUS PA’O,,

Here at the first bodhisattva level, one is able to practice their giving, as they say, without even the slightest bit of that possessive attachment which acts contrary to the perfection where one gives away their own body, and all their outer, material possessions.  But they are not yet able to practice as they will at the second level, where a person avoids—even in their dreams—each & every form of that immorality which works against an ethical way of life.


	[571]
[I.9b]
,RANG SHA STER LA’ANG GUS PAR BYAS PA YIS,
,SNANG DU MI RUNG DPOG PA’I RGYUR YANG ‘GYUR,

The fact that this person
Esteems even the act
Of giving away their own flesh

Acts too as a cause for the deduction
Of something not normally apparent.


[572]
YANG SA DER SNANG DU MI RUNG BA’I RTOGS PA SBYIN PAS DPOG PA NI, PHYI’I YO BYAD STER BA LA GUS PAR MA ZAD, SLONG BA LA RANG GI SHA STER [f. 48a] BA LA’ANG CHES GUS PAR BYAS PA YIS, GANG ZAG GZHAN PHAL CHE BA LA SNANG DU MI RUNG BA’I NANG GI SA THOB PA SOGS DPOG PA’I RGYUR TE GTAN TSIGS SU ‘GYUR TE, DU BA SOGS KYIS ME LA SOGS PA DPOG PA BZHIN NO,,

There is too at this level a deduction, triggered by the giving, of a state of realization which is not normally apparent.  That is, this person not only has a high regard for the act of giving outer, material objects; but they also greatly esteem even the act of giving away their own flesh to someone who asks for it.  This fact then acts as a cause, or sort of a logical reason, which allows someone else to deduce things like the fact that within themselves this person has attained the level—a condition which is not normally apparent to the majority of people.  This is similar to how we deduce facts such as the presence of a fire, from the presence of smoke.


[573]
‘DIS NI LUS SROG DANG LONGS SPYOD GTONG BA LA KUN ‘DZIN GYI DRI MA MED PAR BSTAN TE, DE LTAR BTANG YANG RGYUD RNAM PA GZHAN DU MI ‘GYUR BAR BRTAN PAR GNAS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

All this is meant to indicate that the practitioner is free of the stench of any possessiveness about giving away their own body, their own life, and all that they own.  This in turn is because they have reached a kind of steadfastness in their practice where—even after they had given these things away—the feelings that had inspired them to do so would never change.



How people of a lower type
of being practice giving

[574]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, SBYIN PAS ‘KHOR BA’I BDE BA ‘THOB PA DANG, SBYIN PAS MYANG ‘DAS KYI BDE BA ‘THOB PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

We will cover the second point here—how people of a lower type of being practice giving—in two steps: a description of how we reach happiness in the circle of pain, through the practice of giving; and a description of how we reach the happiness of nirvana, through the same practice.



Why did the Buddha teach giving first?


	[575]
[I.10]
Sukhābhilāṣī sakalo jano’yaṃ
sukhaṃ nṛṇāṃ cāsti vinā na bhogaiḥ,
Bhogāṃś ca dāna prabhavānavetya
Muniḥ purā dāna kathāś cakāra.

,SKYE BO ‘DI KUN BDE BA MNGON ‘DOD CING,
,MI RNAMS BDE BA’ANG LONGS SPYOD MED MIN LA,
,LONGS SPYOD KYANG NI SBYIN LAS ‘BYUNG MKHYEN NAS,
,THUB PAS DANG POR SBYIN PA’I GTAM MDZAD DO,

All people here have a hope
For happiness;
And without things,
Human beings are not happy.

The Able Ones,
Understanding that things
Come from giving,
Thus speak of giving first.


[576]
DANG PO NI, SKYE BO ‘DI RNAMS KUN NI, BKRES SKOM DANG NAD DANG TSA GRANG SOGS KYI SDUG BSNGAL PHYIR BCOS PA’I BDE BA THOB PAR MNGON PAR ‘DOD CING, MI LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI BDE BA DE’ANG ‘DOD PA’I YUL GYI LONGS SPYOD BZA’ BTUNG DANG, NAD GSO BA’I CHAS DANG GOS DANG GNAS KHANG SOGS LA, SPYAD PA MED PAR SKYE BA MIN LA,

Here is the first.  All people here have a hope for happiness, first in the form of alleviating their hunger & thirst; of comfort when they are too hot or too cold; and so on.  And without enjoying the use of things, in the form of the things that they want—be it things to drink or eat; or the things they need to treat some illness; or clothing; or houses to stay in; or all the like—human beings do not feel happy.


[577]
LONGS SPYOD DE RNAMS KYANG NI SNGON SBYIN PA LAS BYUNG BA’I BSOD NAMS BSAGS PA LAS ‘BYUNG BAR MKHYEN NAS, ‘GRO BA THAMS CAD KYI BSAM PA MKHYEN PA’I THUB PAS, CHES DANG POR SBYIN PA’I GTAM NYID MDZAD DE, THABS DE LA ‘JUG PAR YANG SLA BA’I PHYIR RO,,

And the Able Ones, understanding that these things in turn come from accumulating the merit that is created by giving—and also knowing the wishes of all living creatures—thus speak of the practice of giving first, long before anything else.  They understand as well that it is much easier for beings to follow this practice.


	[578]
[I.11]
Kāruṇya hīnā atirūkṣa cittāḥ
svārthāntarā eva bhavanti ye’pi,
Teṣām apīṣṭāḥ prabhavanti bhogā
dānāddhi duḥkhopaśame nidānāt.

,SNYING RJE DMAN ZHING SHIN TU RTZUB SEMS CAN,
,RANG DON LHUR LEN NYID DU ‘GYUR BA GANG,
,DE DAG GI YANG ‘DOD PA’I LONGS SPYOD RNAMS,
,SDUG BSNGAL NYER ZHI’I RGYUR GYUR SBYIN LAS ‘BYUNG,

Even people with little compassion,
Or those with a very cruel heart,
The ones who are only
Watching out for themselves,

Can still get the things they want
From giving, the cause which puts
Suffering to a final rest.


[579]
GAL TE SBYIN PA BTANG BA LAS LONGS SPYOD PHUN SUM TSOGS PA THOB PA DE LA, GTONG BA PO TSUL DANG MTHUN PA DGOS SAM SNYAM NA, DE NI MI DGOS TE [f. 48b] ‘DI LTAR, TSONG PA BZHIN DU NOR CHES CHUNG NGU BTANG BA LAS, ‘BRAS BU NOR GYI PHUNG PO CHES YANGS PA ‘DOD PAS LONGS SPYOD ‘DOD PA’I SLONG MO BA LAS KYANG LONGS SPYOD RGYA CHE BA ‘DOD PAS, SBYIN PA BYED PA LA GUS KYI,

You may be wondering whether this person who engages in the practice of giving needs to be someone who is acting in an appropriate way, in order to acquire excellent things from their giving.  In fact they do not; consider someone like a businessperson who is already extremely wealthy, but who is hoping to reap a tremendous quantity of riches as a result of giving something small to someone; and so has their sights set on gaining great wealth, from even just a single beggar who comes to them asking for some material thing—and so the businessperson has a high regard for the practice of giving.


[580]
BYANG SEMS RNAMS LTAR SNYING RJE’I GZHAN GYI DBANG GIS SBYIN PA’I ‘BRAS BU DON DU MI GNYER BA KHO NAR, SBYIN PAR ‘DOD PA’I DGA’ STON MNGON PAR ‘PHEL BAR MI BYED PA’I GTONG BA PO SNYING RJE DMAN ZHING,

These kinds of people are givers who have little compassion—they are not like the bodhisattvas, who are slaves of their compassion, and who with absolutely no expectations of what they will get back from their giving live in an ever-expanding celebration of the pursuit of generosity.


[581]
DER MA ZAD SEMS CAN LA SEMS SHIN TU RTZUB PA’I SEMS DANG LDAN PA, RANG GI DON MNGON MTHO’I BDE BA TZAM LHUR LEN PA NYID DU ‘GYUR BA STE,

There are as well other types of people with a very cruel heart, the ones who are only watching out for themselves, just trying to reach the higher realms for their own sake.


[582]
GTZO BOR BYED PA GANG YIN PA DE DAG GI STE LA YANG, LONGS SPYOD MI GTONG BAR ‘DZIN PA’I SKYON LA RGYAB KYIS PHYOGS PA RNAM SMIN LA RE BA’I YON TAN TZAM ‘DZIN PA LA G-YER BAG THOB PA’I SBYIN PA LAS, LONGS SPYOD PHUL DU BYUNG BA PHUN TSOGS ‘BYUNG BA’I SGO NAS, BKRES SKOM SOGS KYI SDUG BSNGAL NYE BAR ZHI BA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR RO,,

Even those who make such things their main goal can still get the things they want—the most amazing, excellent things—from a kind of giving where they do exhibit the virtue of being extremely careful to avoid the faults of possessiveness, the refusal to share ones things, but only because they are hoping for some great karmic payoff.  This kind of giving then does become a cause which puts to a final rest sufferings such as hunger, thirst, & the rest.



How we can meet realized beings


	[583]
[I.12]
Kadācid eṣo’pi hi dāna saṅgāt
kvacil labhetārya janena saṅgam,
Tataḥ samucchidya bhava pratānaṃ
śivaṃ prayāyād api tan nidānam.

,’DI YANG SBYIN PA’I SKABS KYIS NAM ZHIG TSE,
,’PHAGS PA’I SKYE BO DANG ‘PHRAD MYUR DU ‘THOB,
,DE NAS SRID RGYUN YANG DAG BCAD BYAS TE,
,DE YI RGYU CAN ZHI BAR ‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR,

Because of these instances of giving then,
Even they at some point will quickly attain
Opportunities to meet people
Who are realized beings.

And then the flow
Of their lives of suffering
Will be stopped completely,

And those with this cause
Will come to peace.
					

[584]
GNYIS PA NI, GANG ZHIG SNYING RJE DANG BRAL BAS RANG GI SDUG BSNGAL PHYIR BCOS PA’I BDE BA TZAM LA LTOS PA NYID KYIS, SBYIN PA GTONG BA LA GUS PA ‘DI YANG, SBYIN BDAG GTONG BA PO’I THAD DU DAM PA DAG GIS BGROD PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR, SBYIN PA GTONG BA’I SKABS KYIS NAM ZHIG GI TSE ‘PHAGS PA’I SKYE BO DANG PHRAD PA MYUR DU ‘THOB BO,,

Which brings us to the second point from above: a description of how we reach the happiness of nirvana, through this same practice of giving.  Consider again these people who have no compassion—those who seek only the happiness of alleviating their own suffering—and thus hold the act of giving in high regard.  Even they then, because of these instances of giving, will at some point quickly attain opportunities to meet people who are realized beings.  This is the case because, as they say, “The holy ones come into the presence of sponsors—meaning all those who give.”


[585]
DE NAS DAM PA DES CHOS BSTAN PA LAS, ‘KHOR BA LA YON TAN MED [f. 49a] PAR RIG CING, ‘PHAGS LAM ZAG PA MED PA MNGON DU BYAS PAS MA RIG PA SPANGS NAS, SRID PA ‘KHOR BA’I RGYUN THOG MED NAS SKYE ‘CHI GCIG NAS GCIG TU BRGYUD PA YANG DAG PAR BCAD PAR BYAS TE, DAM PA DANG PHRAD PA DE YI RGYU CAN NYAN THOS SAM RANG RGYAL GYI ZHI BA MYANG ‘DAS SU ‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And then the holy ones grant these people the teachings, and they come to an understanding that there is no good thing in the cycle of pain.  And then they manifest the immaculate path of a realized being, and rid themselves of misunderstanding.  And then they put a complete stop to the spinning of this beginningless wheel of suffering, lives of births and deaths flowing one after the other.  Thus then those listeners or self-made buddhas with this cause—that is, who have met the holy ones—will come to peace: meaning nirvana.


[586]
GSUM PA LA BZHI, BYANG SEMS KYI SBYIN PA’I PHAN YON THUN MONG MA YIN PA BSTAN PA, RTEN GNYIS KA LA SBYIN PA’I GTAM GTZO BOR BSTAN PA, BYANG SEMS KYIS SBYIN PA’I TSE DGA’ BA JI ‘DRA BA ‘THOB PA BSTAN PA, BYANG SEMS KYIS LUS SBYIN PA LA SDUG BSNGAL YOD MED BSTAN PA’O,,

This brings us to the third of our four steps from before—an explanation of the giving practiced by bodhisattvas.  We proceed in four sections: a description of the unique type of giving practiced by a bodhisattva; a description of how the discussion of giving is primary for both types of people; a description of the kind of happiness that a bodhisattva feels when they are giving; and a description of whether or not a bodhisattva feels pain when they give away their own body.



Happiness comes from giving

	[587]
[I.13]
Jagaddhitāṅgī kṛta mānasās tu
labhyaṃ labhante na cireṇa dānāt,		
Kṛpātmanām apyakṛpātmanāṃ ca
Yatas tato dānakathaiva mūlam.

[I.13a]
,’GRO LA PHAN PAR DAM BCAS YID CAN RNAMS,
,SBYIN PAS RING POR MI THOGS DGA’ BA ‘THOB,

The giving of those
Who have resolved in their hearts
To be of benefit to living beings

Makes them feel happiness,
Not long afterwards.


[588]
DANG PO NI, BYANG SEMS MA YIN PA RNAMS NI SBYIN PAS SLONG BA PO TSIM PAR BYAS PA DANG, DUS MNYAM PA STE DE’I MJUG THOGS NYID DU SBYIN PA’I ‘BRAS BU’I BDE BA LA NGES PAR LONGS SPYOD PA MIN NO,,

Here is the first.  When someone who is not a bodhisattva performs an act of giving and thus satisfies the needs of the person who has asked them for something, there is no certainty that they will experience that happiness which is a result of this giving “at the same time”—meaning immediately subsequent to the giving.


[589]
DES NA DE RNAMS NI SBYIN PA’I ‘BRAS BU MNGON SUM DU MI MTHONG BA’I PHYIR SBYIN PA LA MI ‘JUG PA YANG SRID NA, ‘GRO BA THAMS CAD LA PHUGS SU PHAN PA DANG, ‘PHRAL DU BDE BA SGRUB PAR DAM BCAS PA’I YID CAN GYI BYANG SEMS RNAMS, SBYIN PAS RING POR MI THOGS PAR SLONG BA PO TSIM PAR BYAS PA MTHONG BA’I MJUG THOGS NYID DU, SBYIN PA’I ‘BRAS BU DGA’ BA MCHOG TU GYUR BA ‘THOB CING SBYIN ‘BRAS LA LONGS SPYOD PAS, DUS THAMS CAD KYI TSE SBYIN PA BYED PA LA DGA’ BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As such—because they don’t see the results of their giving in a direct way—there is a possibility that they will fail to engage in the act of giving.  But the bodhisattvas—who have resolved in their hearts to be of benefit to every living being in the long run, and in the short run to make them happy—undertake acts of giving and then not long afterwards (meaning immediately subsequent to seeing that their giving has satisfied the needs of those who have asked them for something) these acts make them feel a supreme form of happiness as the result of their giving.  Having thus enjoyed the fruits of their giving, they are at all times very pleased to engage in giving.



Why giving is the most important

	[590]
	[I.13b]
,GANG PHYIR BRTZE BDAG BRTZE BDAG MA YIN PA,
,DE PHYIR SBYIN PA’I GTAM NYID GTZO BO YIN,

And these are the reasons
Why it is none other 
Than the discussion of giving

Which is primary for both
Those who are the embodiment of love,
And those who are not this embodiment.


[591]
GNYIS PA NI, GANG GI PHYIR SNGAR JI SKAD [f. 49b] BSHAD PA’I TSUL GYIS BRTZE BA’I BDAG NYID BYANG SEMS DANG, BRTZE BA’I BDAG NYID MA YIN PA THAMS CAD KYI MNGON MTHO DANGKYI BDE BA RNAMS SBYIN PAS ‘DREN PA DE’I PHYIR, SBYIN PA’I GTAM NYID GTZO BO STE SHIN TU GAL CHE BA YIN NO,,

Here is our second section, on how the discussion of giving is primary for both types of people.  These then—that is, the points we have discussed just now—are the reasons why it is none other than the discussion of giving which is primary (here meaning “extremely important”) for both those people who are the embodiment of love (the bodhisattvas) and for those who are not an embodiment of this kind; for it is the act of giving which brings to all these people the happiness of both the higher births & definite good. 


[592]
BSHES SPRING LAS KYANG,
,LONGS SPYOD G-YO BA SNYING PO MED MKHYEN NAS,
,DGE SBYONG BRAM ZE BKREN DANG BSHES RNAMS LA,
,SBYIN PA TSUL BZHIN STZAL BGYI PHA ROL TU,
,SBYIN LAS GZHAN PA’I GNYEN MCHOG MA MCHIS SO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The Letter to a Friend says as well,

First understand that your possessions
Are fleeting, and have no essence—

And then work to give, in the proper way,
To the monks; to the brahmans;
To the poor; and the friends.

There is no higher companion
In the world beyond
Than the giving you have done.



The high happiness of a bodhisattva

	[593]
[I.14]
Tyāgena sarvasya śamapraveśaḥ
sukhaṃ vidhatte na tathā Munīnām,
Dehīti śabda śruti bhāvanāyāḥ
sukhaṃ yathodeti jinātmajānām.

,JI LTAR BYIN ZHIG CES SGRA THOS BSAMS LAS,
,RGYAS {%RGYAL} SRAS BDE ‘BYUNG DE LTAR THUB RNAMS LA,
,ZHI BAR ZHUGS PAS BDE BA BYED MIN NA,
,THAMS CAD BTANG BAS LTA ZHIG SMOS CI DGOS,

When a child of the Victors
Hears “Please give it to me,”
And thinks to themselves,

They feel a happiness
Which is even greater
Than the happiness
Of the Able Ones,
When they enter into peace.

What need then is there
To mention how they feel
When they give away everything?
				 

[594]
GSUM PA NI, RGYU GANG LAS BYANG SEMS RNAMS SBYIN PA LA GUS PAR ‘GYUR BA, ,SLONG BA RNAMS LONGS SPYOD KYIS TSIM PAR BYAS PA NA, BYANG SEMS LA DGA’ BA’I KHYAD PAR SKYE BA KO CI ‘DRA ZHIG CI {%CE} NA,

This brings us to the third section: a description of the kind of happiness that a bodhisattva feels when they are giving.  One may ask the following question: “Just what is the cause that makes bodhisattvas—those people who have such a high regard for the act of giving—feel this special type of happiness, when they have given some material thing to to a person who has asked for it from them, and thus satisfied their needs?”


[595]
JI LTAR SLONG BA POS BYIN CIG CES ZER BA’I SGRA THOS PA’I DON BSAMS PA NA, ‘DI DAG NI BDAG LA SLONG BA ZHIG GO SNYAM PA LAS,

Think of when a bodhisattva—a child of the Victors—hears the words “Please give it to me” from a person who is asking them for something.  Then they think to themselves, “I have found someone to ask me for something!”


[596]
RGYAL SRAS LA YID LA BDE BA YANG NAS YANG DU ‘BYUNG BA DE LTAR NI, THUB PA DGRA BCOM PA RNAMS LA ZHI BA MYANG ‘DAS KYI DBYINGS SU ZHUGS PAS, BDE BA SKYED PAR BYED PA MIN NA,

This makes them feel—over & over again—a happiness which is greater even than the happiness that the Able Ones, those destroyers of the enemy, feel when they enter the realm of peace: nirvana.


[597]
PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO THAMS CAD BTANG BAS SLONG BA PO TSIM PAR BYED PAS, ZHI BA DE LAS LHAG PA’I BDE BA SKYED PA LTA CI ZHIG SMOS DGOS TE MI DGOS SO,,

If then they go further and give away every outer & inner thing they have to satisfy the needs of the person who’s asking them for something, what need is there to mention that they feel a happiness greater than this peace?  There is no need!


[598]
ZHI BA DES SEMS PHROGS PA NA GZHAN DON LA G-YEL BAR ‘GYUR LA, BYANG SEMS KYI BDE BA SNGAR BSHAD PA DES SEMS PHROGS [f. 50a] PA NYID KYIS, GZHAN DON LA LHAG PAR YANG BRTZON PAR ‘GYUR BAS MI ‘DRA’O,,

If a person’s heart is stolen away by this kind of peace, then they will lose themselves completely in working for others.  But if your heart is stolen away by nothing less than the happiness of a bodhisattva that we’ve just described, you make even greater efforts to work for others—and so the two are not the same.



Does a bodhisattva feel pain,
when they give away their own flesh?

	[599]
[I.15]
Chittvā śarīraṃ sa dadat svaduḥkhair
duḥkhaṃ pareṣāṃ narakādikaṃ hi,
Paśyan svasaṃvedana yaiva tasya
cchityarthamevāśu karoti vīryam.

,LUS BCAD STER ZHING BDAG GI SDUG BSNGAL GYIS,
,GZHAN DAG RNAMS KYI DMYAL BA LA SOGS PA’I,
,SDUG BSNGAL RANG RIG NYID DU MTHONG NAS NI,
,DE BCAD BYA PHYIR MYUR DU BRTZON ‘GRUS RTZOM,

What do they do with the pain
Of cutting off & giving away
Their own flesh?

When they have seen for themselves
The pain of others—
Those in the hells & the rest—

They leap to do the deed,
In order to cut that pain.


[600]
BZHI PA NI, YANG SBYIN PA BTANG BA GANG LAS BDE BA PHUL BYUNG SKYE BAR BRJOD PA PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO GTONG BA’I BYANG SEMS LA, LUS KYI SDUG BSNGAL YANG MI ‘BYUNG NGAM ZHE NA,

Here finally is the fourth section from above: a description of whether or not a bodhisattva feels pain when they give away their own body.  One might ask the following question: “You have mentioned, in your description of the giving from which the bodhisattva feels such wonderful happiness, their giving away ‘outer & inner things.’  But doesn’t such a bodhisattva feel then bodily pain?”


[601]
BDAG NYID CHEN PO SA THOB PA’I DBANG DU BYAS NAS ‘DRI NA NI, SEMS MED PA RNAMS LA BCAD PA LTAR LUS KYI SDUG BSNGAL MED DE, ‘PHAGS PA NAM MKHA’ MDZOD KYI TING NGE ‘DZIN LAS,

If you are asking this question with regard to those great beings who have reached a bodhisattva level, then the answer is that in this moment they feel no suffering at all: it is just as if you have cut an inanimate object with a knife.  This recalls a statement in the exalted Concentration of Gagana Ganja:


[602]
‘DI LTA STE, DPER NA SHING S’A LA CHEN PO’I TSAL ZHIG YOD LA, DER ‘GA’ ZHIG ‘ONGS NAS S’A LA GCIG BCAD PA NA, DER SHING S’A LA LHAG MA DE RNAMS ‘DI SNYAM DU ‘DI NI BCAD PA’O, ,BDAG CAG NI MA BCAD PA’O SNYAM DU SEMS SHING, DE DAG LA RJES SU CHAGS PA DANG KHONG KHRO BA MED DO, ,RTOG PA DANG RNAM PAR RTOG PA MED DO,,

This then is how it is.  Picture a forest of huge sal trees.  And then suppose that some people show up and cut one of them down.  It’s not as if the remaining trees think to themselves, “Oh, they cut one of us down.  But they aren’t cutting the rest of us down.” The trees don’t feel attachment, and they don’t feel anger.  The fact is that they have no thoughts—no awareness at all.


[603]
BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I BZOD PA DE LTA BU GANG YIN PA ‘DI NI, BZOD PA YONGS SU DAG PA MCHOG NAM MKHA’ DANG MNYAM PA YIN NO, ZHES JI SKAD GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

The type of forbearance which a bodhisattva possesses is similar; it is a totally pure forbearance, the highest of its kind, and equal to space itself.


[604]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,DE LA LUS KYI SDUG BSNGAL MED,
,YID KYI SDUG BSNGAL GA LA YOD,
,DE NI SNYING RJES ‘JIG RTEN SDUG
,DE NYID KYIS NI YUN RING GNAS,
ZHES GSUNGS PA ‘DI YANG SA THOB PA LA DGONGS SO,,

The String of Precious Jewels says as well:

They feel no pain in their body;
So how could they in their mind?

They stay in the world out of compassion;
And for the same reason stay here long.

This statement, by the way, is also made with regard to someone who has attained the levels of the bodhisattva.


[605]
YANG LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD LA KUN ‘DZIN GYI CHAGS PA MED PA’I SA RAB TU DGA’ BA MA THOB PA’I DBANG DU BYAS NAS ‘DRI NA NI [f. 50b] LUS GNAS PA DANG ‘GAL BA’I RKYEN RANG GI LUS LA BABS PAS, LUS KYI SDUG BSNGAL GDON MI ZA BAR ‘BYUNG MOD KYANG, DE’I TSE YANG SDUG BSNGAL DE LA BRTEN NAS SEMS CAN GYI DON LA LHAG PAR ‘JUG PA’I RGYU NYID DU GNAS TE,

Suppose though that the same question is asked with regard to someone who has yet to achieve the bodhisattva level of Perfect Happiness—a stage where one is free of attachment which grasps on to ones body or possessions.  In this case a person will beyond any doubt experience bodily suffering, since something has befallen the body which is a factor acting in contradiction to the body’s continued existence.  Nonetheless, even at this point they utilize this pain as just another reason for redoubling their efforts to work for the sake of other living beings.


[606]
‘DI LTAR BYANG SEMS RNAMS NI, DMYAL BA DANG, DUD ‘GRO DANG, YI DVAGS LA SOGS PA’I ‘GRO BA MI BZAD PAR CHUD PA, BAR MTSAMS MED PAR SDUG BSNGAL CHEN PO DRAG POS LUS ‘JOMS PA, RANG GI LUS GCOD PA’I SDUG BSNGAL LAS STONG ‘GYUR LAS KYANG CHES LHAG PA’I SDUG BSNGAL BSRAN DU MED PA DANG LDAN PA DAG LA BLTAS PA NA,

And so the bodhisattvas look upon those who have been forced into these unbearable forms of life—those in the realms of hell, or living as animals, or craving spirits, and all the rest; their bodies battered by extreme torment.  And what they see is that these beings are undergoing pain which is completely intolerable—thousands of times greater than the pain that the bodhisattva feels when they cut their own flesh.


[607]
SLONG BA PO LA RANG LUS BCAD NAS STER BA’I BDAG GI SDUG BSNGAL GYIS TE SDUG BSNGAL LA RTZIS MED PAR BYAS NAS, RANG GIS SDUG BSNGAL NYAMS SU MYONG BA DE NYID KYI RGYU MTSAN LAS, SEMS CAN GZHAN DAG RNAMS KYI DMYAL BA LA SOGS PA’I SDUG BSNGAL DE GCAD PA’I PHYIR DU CHOS {%CHES} MYUR DU BRTZON ‘GRUS RTZOM MO,,

And when the bodhisattva cuts the flesh from their own body and gives it away to someone who asks them for it, the first words they say are “With this pain of mine”—meaning they pay no attention at all to their own pain, but rather see this same suffering they are undergoing themselves as a reason: as something whose purpose is to cut off the suffering of other living beings—those living in the hell realms, and so on.  And so they immediately leap to do the deed.


[608]
‘DI NI NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS,
,LUS NI BCAD NAS BYIN PA’I SDUG BSNGAL DES,
,DMYAL BA LA SOGS SDUG BSNGAL GZHAN DAG LA,
,BLTAS NAS RANG GI NYAMS SU MYONG DE LAS,
,GCOD PA’I DON DU DE NI BRTZON PAR BYED,
,CES ‘BYUNG BA DANG ‘GYUR GNYIS KA LA BRTEN PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

We also see these lines translated by Naktso as:

What do they do with the pain
Of cutting off their flesh,
And giving it away?

They look upon those other pains—
Of people in the hells and such—
And leap to do the deed,

Hoping that what
They will undergo themselves
Will serve to cut the others.

For my own explanation here, I have utilized both translations.


[609]
DE ‘DRA BA’I BSAM PA’I STOBS YOD NA LUS GTONG BA YIN LA, BSAM PA DE YANG SA MA THOB PA LA ‘ONG BA MI ‘GAL BAS, SA MA THOB PAS KYANG LUS GTONG [f. 51a] BA GSUNGS SO,,

If a person possesses an intention with this degree of strength, then they will be able to give away their body; and it is no contradiction to say that this intention can come to one even before they attain the bodhisattva levels.  As such, it has been stated that even those who have yet to attain these levels do give away their bodies.



The different kinds of
the perfection of giving

	[610]
	[I.16]
Deya pratigrāhaka dātṛ śūnyaṃ
lokottarā pāramiteti dānam,		
Nirucyate tat traya jāta saṅgaṃ
sā laukikī pāramiteti diṣṭam.

	[I.16a]
,SBYIN PA SBYIN BYA LEN PO GTONG POS STONG,
,’JIG RTEN ‘DAS PA’I PHA ROL PHYIN ZHES BYA,

Giving which is void
Of anything which is given;

And anyone who receives it;
And anyone who gives it

Is what we say
Is a “perfection beyond the world.”


[611]
BZHI PA NI, GTONG BA’I SEMS PA’I SBYIN PA ‘DI YANG SBYIN PAR BYA BA DANG, LEN PA PO DANG, GTONG BA POR BDEN PAR DMIGS PAS STONG PA’I SHES RAB ZAG PA MED PAS ZIN PA NI, ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA ZHES BYA’O, ZHES SHES RAB KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA CHEN MO LAS GSUNGS TE, 

This brings us to the fourth step of our description of the high quality where we bring our practice to a higher level: a presentation of the divisions of the perfection of giving.  Now the great Perfection of Wisdom says that—

That perfection which we say is “beyond the world” is where the giving of the bodhisattva doing the act is performed in a way where it is imbued with immaculate wisdom: where the object which is given; and the person receiving it; and the person giving it are all void of being considered to exist in truth.


[612]
MI DMIGS PA’I ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG NI ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA YIN PAS DES ZIN PA’I SBYIN PA YANG ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I PHA ROL TU PHYIN PAR BZHAG LA, MI DMIGS PA DES MA ZIN PA’I SBYIN PA NI ‘JIG RTEN PA’O,,

The deep meditative state of a realized being who is no longer looking at things as coming from themselves is beyond the world; as such, we say that the giving which is imbued with this state of mind is a perfection which is beyond the world.  Giving which is not imbued with no longer looking at things that way then is considered to be worldly.


[613]
DE GNYIS KYI RNAM PAR DBYE BA NI DON DAM PA’I BYANG SEMS MA THOB PA DAG GIS MNGON SUM DU NGES PAR MI NUS SO,,

The distinction between these two is something that those who have yet to achieve the ultimate form of the Wish for enlightenment are incapable of perceiving directly.


[614]
DE LA PHA ROL NI ‘KHOR BA’I RGYA MTSO’I PHAR ‘GRAM DANG, NGOGS TE SGRIB GNYIS MA LUS PA SPANGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS SO, ,PHA ROL TU SON PA NI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’O,,

When we say “beyond” here, what we’re referring to is the far side or shore of the ocean of cyclic existence: the state of enlightenment where one has rid oneself of every form of the two obstacles.  The word “perfection” as we use it here means “passed” or “gone” to that far shore.


[615]
‘DIR ‘GREL PAR TSIG PHYI MA YOD NA MI MNGON PAR MI BYA’O, ZHES BYA BA’I MTSAN NYID ‘DIS LAS KYI RNAM PAR DBYE BA MI MNGON PAR MA BYAS PAS GZUGS SU GYUR PA’AM, PRi {%PRE} shO DA RA LA SOGS PA YIN PA’I PHYIR MA’I MTHA’ CAN NYID DU BZHAG {%GZHAG} GO ,

On this point, the autocommentary says—

Remember the injunction that “If there is an elided m letter, don’t fail to show it”; meaning that we should leave the final m as it is when we have an instance of the accusative case: we shouldn’t fail to represent it physically, as we would with examples such as preshodara.


[616]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON PAndI TA DZA YA A’A NAN+TA ‘DI LTAR ‘CHAD DE, RGYA GAR GYI SKAD LA PHA ROL LA P’A RA DANG, PHYIN PA LA AI T’A ZHES PA YOD LA, TSIG GNYIS SDUD PAR BYED PA’I DUS SU P’A RA LA RNAM DBYE GNYIS PA’I GCIG TSIG AAM BYIN, AI T’A’I RJES SU RNAM DBYE DANG PO’I TSIG SU BYIN TE, P’A RA [f. 51b] MRA {MA\} AI T’A PA RA MI T’A ZHES TSIG BSDU BAR BYAS NA, AAM DANG SU MI MNGON PAR ‘GRO BA YIN NA’ANG, ‘DIR TSIG PHYI MA YOD NA MI MNGON PAR MI BYA’O, ZHES PA’I SGRA’I RTZA BA’I TSIG GIS SU MI MNGON PAR BYED KYANG AAM MI MNGON PAR MA BYAS PA’O,,

The meaning of these lines is explained by Pandit Jayananda as follows:

In Sanskrit, the word for “other side” is para; whereas the word for “gone” is ita.  When the two words are combined, we add a final m to the end of the para, to represent the singular form of the second grammar case [the accusative].  After the ita we would add a –su ending for the first grammar case [the nominative].  Thus we have param and ita, which combine into paramita.  And although an m and su could have not been shown, we are told here “don’t fail to show it” when a final m could have been elided.  This is an instruction from the root texts on the study of Sanskrit, saying that—although we may drop the su physically—we should not do so with the m.


[617]
MTSAN NYID ‘DIS LAS KYI RNAM PAR DBYE BA ZHES PA NI, RNAM DBYE GNYIS PA’I GCIG TSIG AAM MO, ,DE MI MNGON PAR MA BYAS PAS P’A RA MI T’A ZHES PA’I SGRA’I RANG BZHIN DU GYUR PA’O,,

The part about an “injunction” concerning the “accusative case” is a reference to the singular form of the second grammar case, where the ending is m.  When you don’t fail to represent it, you come out with paramita, simply by the way that Sanskrit is structured.


[618]
PRi shO DA RA LA SOGS PA’I NANG NA P’A RA MRA {%MA\} ZHES PA’I TSIG MA’I MTHA’ CAN TE, P’A RA MRA {%MA\} ZHES BRJOD PA YIN PAS MI MNGON PAR MI BYA’O ZHES BSHAD DE, AA MRA {%MA\} GYI AA PHYIS MRA {%MA\} BZHAG PA LA AI BYIN PAS MI T’AR SONG ZHES PA’O, ,

And so the param here, with m at the end, needs to be pronounced as param, and we “should not fail to show” the m, as is done within words such as pirshodara.  Technically, the ending here is –am, and we drop the a and leave the -m, adding the following i straight on so we come out with mita.  And so this is what’s being said in this section. 


[619]
DANG PO’I TSIG SU NI MA DAG PA ‘DRA BAS SI YIN NAM DPYAD DO,,

It seems as though the syllable su mentioned in the first part here might be a misspelling; I think perhaps it is supposed to be si—this is something that should be examined further.


[620]
BOD KHA CIG PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I RGYA SKAD LA P’A RAm AI T’A ZHES PA YOD PA’I RA’I KLAD KOR GRAL DU BZHAG PAS P’A RAM AI T’AR ‘GYUR BA LA, MTSAMS SBYAR BA’I TSE AI YIG GI GI GU MA LA BYIN, AA PHYIS PAS MI T’AR SONG ZER BA SOGS KYI MUN SPRUL GYI BSHAD PA MANG DU SNANG NA YANG, PAndI TA’I BSHAD PA SNGAR BKOD PA NYID LEGS SO,,

It appears that here some Tibetan writers have indulged in quite a few different harebrained explanations such as saying—

In explaining the original Sanskrit for the word perfection, we take the little circle over the r in the word pāraṃitā [पारं  अिता] and set it down in the row with the other letters, and so we come out with pāram itā [पारम अिता].  When we do the phonetic joining here, the i [ि]vowel sign of the i [अि] changes to ma; then the a of the ma is dropped, and we come out with the mita.

Nonetheless, it is only the explanation of the Pandit, as we have just presented it, which is well done.


[621]
SBYIN PA SBYIN BYA ZHES PA’I RKANG PA GNYIS KYIS ‘KHOR GSUM MI DMIGS PAR RTOGS PA’I SHES RAB BZUNG NAS, DES ZIN PA’I SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN BYE BRAG TU BSHAD PA YIN TE, DES MA ZIN PA’I SBYIN PA LA SOGS PA RNAMS NI, SHES RAB KYIS ZIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN DANG ‘DRA BAS PHAR PHYIN ZHES BYA’O,,

The two lines [in the Tibetan] which speak about a “giving” and “anything which is given” are identifying a state of wisdom which perceives that the three spheres of any particular act have no existence; and, more particularly, they are explaining the perfection of giving which is imbued with this wisdom.  Acts of giving & the rest which are not thus imbued are referred to as “perfections,” but only because they resemble perfections which are imbued with this wisdom.


[622]
[f. 52a] DE YANG SHES RAB KYIS MA ZIN KYANG BYANG CHUB CHEN POR BSNGOS PAS ZIN PAS PHA ROL TU ‘GRO BAR NGES PA LA BZHAG PA’I PHYIR, SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN GYI MING RNYED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And—even if it is not imbued with that wisdom—an act of giving can still deserve to be called “the perfection of giving” if it is imbued with a dedication of this act to achieving the Great Enlightenment; since then we can say, with certainty, that it will take one to the other side; [which is, again, the literal meaning of the Sanskrit word paramita].


[623]
DES NA PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I DON LA PHA ROL ‘DIR PHYIN PA ZHES LAS LA SBYAR NA, SANGS RGYAS KYI SAR PHYIN PA YIN LA, ‘DIS PHA ROL TU PHYIN PAR BYED PA ZHES BYED PA LA SBYAR NA, SLOB LAM NA YANG PHAR PHYIN YOD DO,,

Thus if we render the expression “perfection” as meaning “arrived here at the other side”—as referring to the finished deed—then we would have to say that it connotes having reached the level of a Buddha.  If rather we render it as “that which gets you to the other side”—something like a “perfectionizer”—then we can say that a perfection can be present even when we are still on the paths of learning.


[624]
SBYIN PA LA BSHAD PA DES TSUL KHRIMS LA SOGS PA LA YANG SEMS BSKYED DANG, BSNGO BA DANG, SHES RAB KYIS ZIN PA SO SO BA DANG GNYIS KA RIG PA BYA’O,,

You should understand that this clarification of the act of giving can be applied—both individually, and to the pair—when we are speaking of cases where leading an ethical way of life, and the rest, are said to be imbued by the Wish for enlightenment, dedication, and wisdom.


	[625]
	[I.16b]
,GSUM PO DAG LA CHAGS SKYES GYUR PAS DE,
,’JIG RTEN PA YI PHA ROL PHYIN CES BSTAN,

When a person feels an attachment
To all the three of these,

This has been taught
As a “perfection of the world.”
				

[626]
SBYIN PA’I ‘KHOR GSUM PO DAG LA CHAGS PA STE BDEN ZHEN SKYES PAR GYUR PAS BCINGS NA NI, SBYIN PA DE LA ‘JIG RTEN PA’I PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA ZHES MDO LAS BSTAN NO,,

When a person feels an attachment to all three of these spheres within the act of giving—that is, when they are chained by a feeling where they believe that these things exist in truth—this has been taught in the sutras as a “perfection of the world.”


[627]
DE LTAR BSHAD PA RNAMS LA DA LTA NAS NYAMS SU LEN TSUL NI, LUS GZHAN LA STER BA DANG, DGA’ BA SKYED TSUL KHYAD PAR CAN RNAMS NI MOS YUL DU BYAS NAS SBYONG LA, ZANG ZING GI SBYIN PA GZHAN RNAMS NI YAR MAR GYI ZHING LA BRTEN NAS, CHU YAN CHAD GTONG BA’I SGO NAS RGYUN LDAN DU SOG PA DANG, DE’I TSE ‘KHOR GSUM MI DMIGS PAR RTOGS PA’I SHES RAB KYIS ZIN PAR BYA’O,,

How do we put into practice, starting right now, all that we have explained here?  Things like giving away our own flesh to others, and having some extraordinary feeling of joy about it, are practices that we can practice as aspirations.  Things like giving material stuff away to others—to those who are both higher and lower objects of offering—are karmas that we can collect on a continual basis.  As we do, we should make sure these practices are imbued with the wisdom which realizes that none of the three spheres exist.


[628]
DE YANG RANG GI LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD DANG DGE RTZA GSUM SEMS CAN GYI DON DU BSAM PAS YANG YANG GTONG BA DANG, MA BTANG YANG DE RNAMS ‘JIG PAS ‘DOR DGOS LA, GTONG TSOD ‘DRA BA LA SNGON DU RANG GI BSAM PAS GTONG BA [f. 52b] MCHOG YIN PA RNAMS BSAM STE,

If you think about it, we have to give up all these things, just the same: we can either give them away consciously—give away the three of our flesh, our things, and the good things we have done—for the sake of others; or we will have to give them up later anyway, even if we refuse to do so now, but in a state of terror.  Think then to yourself that the very best thing to do would be to give them away before that day, now, purposely.


[629]
SPYOD ‘JUG LAS,
,LUS DANG DE BZHIN LONGS SPYOD DANG,
,DUS GSUM DGE BA THAMS CAD KYANG,
,SEMS CAN KUN GYI DON BSGRUB PHYIR,
,PHANGS PA MED PAR GTANG BAR BYA,
ZHES DANG,

As the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life puts it,

Give up everything you have:
Your own flesh, the things you own,

And the good things you do
In the past, in the present, in the future—

All for the sake
Of every living being.


	[630]
,THAMS CAD BTANG BAS MYA NGAN ‘DA’,
,BDAG BLO MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA SGRUB,
,THAMS CAD GTONG BAR CHABS CIG LA,
,SEMS CAN RNAMS LA BTANG BA MCHOG
,CES GSUNGS PA LTAR BYA’O,,

We reach nirvana
Giving up all we have;

Let me reach it then
Within my own mind:

It’s best, when I give it all up,
To do the giving
To every living being.



The moonstone

	[631]
	[I.17]
Jinatanaya manaḥ pratiṣṭhiteyaṃ
jayati sadāśraya labdha kānti śobhā,
Bahalam api tamo vidhūya sarvam
iti muditā śaśino maṇir yathaiva.

,DE LTAR RGYAL BA’I SRAS KYI YID LA RAB GNAS SHING,
,DAM PA’I RTEN LA ‘OD CHAGS MDZES PA RNYED GYUR PA’I,
,DGA’ BA ‘DI NI NOR BU CHU SHEL JI BZHIN DU,
,MUN PA STUG PO THAMS CAD RNAM PAR BSAL NAS RGYAL,

Thus does the happiness we have found
Rest, perfectly, within the mind
Of a child of the Victors;

Thus does its light, like a moonstone,
Lend great beauty to this ultimate setting;

Thus does it clear away and conquer
All the masses of darkness [f. 202b].


[632]
GSUM PA NI, DA NI SNGAR JI SKAD BRJOD PA’I SA RAB DGA’ ZHES PA ZAG MED KYI SHES PA’I KHYAD PAR GYIS, SA DE’I YON TAN MDOR BSDUS TE BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS BSTAN PA NI,

This bring us to our third and final point from above; that is, we will give a concluding summary of the first level, named Perfect Happiness, by describing its high qualities, singling out the quality of immaculate knowledge. 


[633]
SA RAB TU DGA’ BA ‘DI NI NOR BU CHU SHEL ZLA BA’I DKYIL ‘KHOR BZHIN DU GNAS SO, ,’DI LA ZLA BA DANG CHOS MTHUN GSUM LAS, DANG PO GNAS MTHON POR GNAS PA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTA BUR SA’I YON TAN THOB PA’I RGYAL BA’I SRAS SA DANG PO BA’I YID LA RAB TU GNAS PA’I PHYIR, LAM MTHON POR GNAS PAS ZLA BA NAM MKHA’I GNAS MTHON POR GNAS PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

The bodhisattva level of Perfect Happiness is like the disc of the moon, which is made of moonstone.  The simile of the moon for this level extends to three characteristics—the first being that it rests in a high place.  This level rests, perfectly, within the mind of a child of the Victors—a bodhisattva—who has attained the high qualities of this level, as we have described above.  As such, it rests in a very high place; and so it is similar to the way in which the moon rests in a high place in the sky.


[634]
SA DANG PO NI BYANG SEMS DE’I YID KYI CHA SHAS SHIG YIN PAS DE LA GNAS ZHES BYA STE, DPER NA MGO LA MIG GNAS PA BZHIN NO,,

When we say that the first bodhisattva level “rests” in the mind of this bodhisattva, what we mean is that it is a part of their mind—in the same way that, for example, we say that the eye rests in the head.


[635]
SA DANG PO’I DON DAM PA’I SEMS DE RANG GANG LA GNAS PA’I DAM PA STE MCHOG GI RTEN DE’I YID DE, YE SHES KYI ‘OD CHAGS PAS MDZES PA RNYED PAR GYUR PA’I PHYIR, ZLA BAS RANG GI RTEN GYI NAM MKHA’ ‘OD DKAR POS MDZES PAR BYED PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

The ultimate state of mind of a person at the first bodhisattva level covers the “ultimate”—meaning the high setting of the person in whom this state rests—with the light of understanding, thus lending it great beauty.  It is thus again similar to the moon, which with its alabaster light lends great beauty to its setting: the sky.


[636]
YANG SA DANG PO NI RANG GI MI MTHUN PHYOGS MTHONG SPANG RNAMS LAS RGYAL TE GNAS PA’I PHYIR, [f. 53a] ZLA BAS MUN PA STUG PO STE ‘THUG PO THAMS CAD RNAM PAR BSAL NAS GNAS PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

We can also say that the first bodhisattva level rests in a state where we have conquered, or rid ourselves of, what works against it: the negativities which we eliminate at the path of seeing.  As such, it resembles the way in which the moon rests in a state where it has cleared away all the “masses” or thick clouds of darkness.



	[637]
	[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA DANG PO’O,,

This concludes the first wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
of Entering the Middle Way.


[638]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA DANG PO’I RNAM PAR BSHAD PA’O,, ,,

This concludes our explanation of the first ultimate “wish for enlightenment,” or chapter, of An Illumination of the True Thought, an expanded explanation of Entering the Middle Way.






Chapter 2
Immaculate






Chapter 2
Immaculate


How, at this level,
ones ethical life is completely pure

[639]
GNYIS PA SA GNYIS PA DRI MA MED PA BSHAD PA LA LNGA, SA ‘DIR TSUL KHRIMS YONGS SU DAG PAR BSTAN PA DANG, TSUL KHRIMS KYI BSNGAGS PA BSTAN PA DANG, TSUL KHRIMS KYI MI MTHUN PHYOGS DANG MA ‘DRES PA’I DPE BSTAN PA DANG, TSUL KHRIMS KYI PHAR PHYIN GYI DBYE BA BSTAN PA DANG, SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS MJUG BSDU BA’O,,

Here is our second division from above, which is an explanation of the second bodhisattva level: Immaculate.  This has five parts of its own: a presentation about how, at this level, ones ethical life is completely pure; a presentation of the praises of an ethical life; the presentation of a metaphor to describe how—at this level—ones ethical life is beyond any adulteration by the things that could work against it; a presentation of the divisions of the perfection of an ethical life; and a concluding summary of this level, accomplished by describing its high qualities.


[640]
DANG PO LA BZHI, SA ‘DIR TSUL KHRIMS PHUN SUM TSOGS PAR BSTAN PA, DE LA BRTEN NAS YON TAN YONGS SU DAG PAR BSTAN PA, SA DANG PO LAS TSUL KHRIMS LHAG PAR BSTAN PA, TSUL KHRIMS YONGS SU DAG PA’I RGYU GZHAN BSTAN PA’O,,

The first of these five has four divisions of its own: a presentation about how, at this level, ones ethical life is truly excellent; a presentation of how, due to this ethical life, ones good qualities are totally pure; a presentation of how ones ethical life, at this point, exceeds that of the first level; and a presentation of additional causes that make our ethical life totally pure.



Our ethical life is excellent

	[641]
[II.1]
Svapne’pi dauḥśīlya mala prahīṇaḥ
sa śīla sampad guṇa śuddhi yogāt,	
Saṃśuddha vāk kaya manaḥ pracāro
daśāpi satkarma pathāṃś cinoti.


[II.1a]
,DE TSUL PHUN TSOGS YON TAN DAG LDAN PHYIR,
,RMI LAM DU YANG ‘CHAL KHRIMS DRI MA SPANGS,

Their ethical way of life
Possesses both an excellence
And high qualities;

As such, they have rid themselves
Of the stench of immorality,
Even in their dreams.


[642]
DANG PO NI, SA GNYIS PA LA GNAS PA DE NI, TSUL KHRIMS RAB TU GYUR PA’I PHUN SUM TSOGS PA DANG, YON TAN RNAMS DAG PA DANG LDAN PA’I PHYIR, SAD PAR MA ZAD RMI LAM DU YANG ‘CHAL BA’I TSUL KHRIMS KYI DRI MA SPANGS PA STE DES MA GOS PA’O,,

Here is the first.  The ethical way of life of a person who is staying at the second bodhisattva level possesses possesses both an excellence—a preeminence; and certain high qualities.  As such, they have rid themselves of (which is to say, they are unsullied by) the stench of immorality; not only while they are waking, but even in their dreams.


[643]
‘DI NI RTZA LTUNG DANG RANG BZHIN GYI KHA NA MA THO BA TZAM GYI ‘CHAL KHRIMS MIN GYI, BCAS PA DANG ‘GAL BA THAMS CAD KYI ‘CHAL KHRIMS KYI DRI MA SPANGS PA’O,,

All this is meant to convey that they have rid themselves of the stench not only of immorality restricted to primary downfalls and bad deeds which are inherently  reprehensible; but also of the stench of immorality in the form of any deed which contradicts the teachings on actions which have been pronounced wrong.


[644]
DE LA ‘CHAL KHRIMS KUN NAS SLONG BA’I NYON MONGS DANG DU MA LEN PA DANG, BCAS PA [f. 53b] DANG ‘GAL BA’I SDIG PA’I LAS MI ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR NA, BCAS ‘GAL GYI LTUNG BA BYUNG BA LA ‘GYOD PA’I ME ZHI BAS BSIL BA THOB PA’I PHYIR TSUL KHRIMS TE,

This practitioner no longer allows themselves the negative emotions which act as the motivation for immorality; and with this person, there no longer occurs the kind of harmful deeds that are in conflict with the instructions on actions which are prohibited.  As such, they have extinguished the fire of the regret that a person feels when they have fallen, by contradicting these instructions.  And thus they have achieved a kind of refreshing coolness; that is, an ethical way of life.


[645]
DE’I SKAD DOD SH’I LA LA SH’I TA BSIL BA DANG, LA TI THOB PA LA ‘JUG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The mention here of “achieving a refreshing coolness” is a reference to the original Sanskrit term for an ethical way of life, which is shila.  This is composed of two parts: shita, which means “coolness”; and lati, which means “to achieve.”


[646]
YANG NA BDE BA’I RGYU NYID KYIS DAM PAS BSTEN BYA YIN PA’I PHYIR TSUL KHRIMS TE, ‘DI YANG NGES TSIG GI BSHAD PA’O,,

We can also say that an ethical way of life is referred to as shila in that—since it is the one & only cause of happiness—it is something that holy ones should rely upon.  This too is an explanation based on the etymology.


[647]
DE NI NGO BO’I DBANG DU BYAS NA LUS NGAG GI ‘CHAL TSUL BDUN SPONG BA’I SPONG BDUN GYI MTSAN NYID CAN YIN LA, MA CHAGS PA BRNAB SEMS MED PA DANG, GNOD SEMS KYI ZHE SDANG MED PA DANG, LOG LTA DANG BRAL BA’I YANG DAG PA’I LTA BA NI, SPONG BDUN KUN NAS SLONG BAR BYED PAS NA KUN NAS SLONG BYED DANG BCAS PA’I DBANG DU BYAS NA, NAG PO’I LAS LAM BCU SPONG BA’I DKAR PO’I LAS LAM GYI SPONG BA BCU’O,,

Treating an ethical way of life from the viewpoint of its essential nature, we can describe it as defined by “ridding oneself of the seven”—referring to ridding oneself of seven forms of immorality expressed in ones bodily and verbal actions.  But we may go further and speak of freedom from attachment, meaning freedom from covetousness; freedom from anger, or the wish to harm; and the achievement of correct view, free of mistaken views.  And so if we treat the seven in conjunction with the states of mind which motivate them, we can speak of the ethical way of life as “ridding oneself of the ten”—a way of life which consists of ten white karmic paths where we have rid ourselves of ten black karmic paths.



Our good qualities are totally pure

	[648]
[II.1b]
,LUS NGAG YID KYI RGYU BA DAG GYUR PAS,
,DAM PA’I LAS LAM BCU CHAR SOG PAR BYED,

Since the movements
Of their body & speech & mind
Are pure,

They accumulate all ten
Of the ultimate karmic paths.
				

[649]
GNYIS PA NI, YANG BYANG SEMS DE TSUL KHRIMS JI LTAR PHUN SUM TSOGS PAS, YON TAN RNAMS DAG PAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA, LUS DANG NGAG DANG YID KYI RGYU BA STE KUN SPYOD GSUM, SAD PA DANG RMI LAM GYI SKABS KUN TU LTUNG BA PHRA MOS KYANG DAG PAR GYUR PAS, DAM PA STE MCHOG GI LAS LAM BCU CHAR MA TSANG BA MED PAR SOG PAR BYED DE,

Here is the second division from above: how, due to this ethical life, ones good qualities are totally pure.  One may ask, “How is it that the excellence of a bodhisattva’s ethical way of life makes their good qualities pure?”  The movements of their body, speech, and mind—all three forms of a person’s actions—are pure, in the sense that they are free of even the most subtle moral error, in every situation: whether they are awake or even asleep.  As such they accumulate all ten of the ultimate—or highest—karmic paths, missing none of them.


[650]
DGE BA’I LAS LAM DANG PO SROG GCOD SPONG BA SOGS GSUM NI LUS KYIS DANG, BAR GYI BZHI NI NGAG GIS DANG, THA MA GSUM YID KYIS RDZOGS PAR BYED PA NI SOG PAR BYED PA’I DON NO,,

The meaning of the term “accumulate” here is that the three beginning with the first of the paths of virtue—giving up the taking of life—are completed through actions of ones body; the four in the middle are completed through actions of ones speech; and the final three are completed through actions of ones mind.


[651]
DE YANG DGAG BCAS KYI MTSAMS LAS LDOG PAR MA [f. 54a] ZAD, TSUL KHRIMS LAS BRTZAMS PA’I SGRUB BCAS KYI PHYOGS KUN RDZOGS PAR BYED PA’O,,

The point here, by the way, is not only that a person leading an ethical way of life has been able to turn away from transgressing deeds pronounced to be things that we shouldn’t do; but they have been able as well to accomplish the opposite: deeds which, from a moral viewpoint, have been pronounced to be things that we should do.



Our life is even more ethical

	[652]
[II.2]
Panthāna ete kuśalā daśāpi
tasyādhikaṃ śuddhatarā bhavanti,		
Śāntyā ca kāntyā ca sa tair vibhāti
sadā viśuddhaḥ śaradīva candraḥ.

,DGE BA’I LAM ‘DI LTA ZHIG BCU CHAR YANG,
,DE LA KLAGS TE SHIN TU DAG PAR ‘GYUR,
,STON KA’I ZLA LTAR RTAG TU RNAM DAG DE,
,ZHI ‘OD CHAGS PAR DE DAG GIS RNAM MDZES,

They possess these same
Ten paths of goodness
In a way which is even better,
Reaching extreme purity.

They are always pure,
Like the autumn moon,
Made lovely by both
Peacefulness and light.


[653]
GSUM PA NI, YANG CI LAS KYI LAM ‘DI RNAMS SA DANG PO’I BYANG SEMS KYIS KYANG BCU CHAR TSANG BAR SOG PAR MI BYED DAM ZHE NA,

Which brings us to our third division—how ones ethical life, at this point, exceeds that of the first bodhisattva level.  “But doesn’t a bodhisattva at the first level,” one may ask, “also accumulate all ten of these karmic paths, missing none of them?”


[654]
DES KYANG SOG MOD KYI ‘ON KYANG DGE BA’I LAS KYI LAM ‘DI LTA ZHIG BCU CHAR YANG, SA GNYIS PA BA DE LA KLAGS PA STE SHIN TU PHUL DU BYUNG BAR DAG PAR ‘GYUR BA DE LTAR SA DANG PO BA NI MA YIN NO,,

Admittedly they do accumulate all ten; but people at the second bodhisattva level possess these same ten paths of goodness in a way which is even better, reaching extreme, exceptional purity; whereas this is not the case with the ten possessed by the person at the first level.


[655]
‘DI LA SA DANG POR SBYIN PA LHAG PAR GSUNGS PA NI YAR LDAN DU YOD PAS, SBYIN PA LAS GZHAN PA’I PHAR PHYIN LHAG MA DGU’I NANG NAS, TSUL KHRIMS LAS BRTZAMS PA’I NYAMS LEN PHUL DU BYUNG BA’I TSOD TZAM BZOD PA SOGS LA MED PA’I PHYIR, TSUL KHRIMS LHAG PAR GSUNGS KYI, PHAR PHYIN LHAG MA RNAMS MED PA NI MIN NO,,

Now when we say that the giving of a person at the first bodhisattva level is “higher,” what we mean is that they are working their way up; and so here—from among the nine perfections other than giving—one has reached an exceptional practice of the perfection of an ethical way of life; but has not yet reached this same degree in their practice of patience & the rest.  It is only in this context that we say their practice of an ethical way of life is “higher”; it is not to imply that they lack the remaining perfections.


[656]
DGE BCU SMOS PA NI DE LAS BRTZAMS PA’I TSUL KHRIMS KYI BCAS PA’I MTSON BYED YIN PAS, TSUL KHRIMS KYI BCAS MTSAMS THAMS CAD GZUNG NGO,,

And when we mention here the ten good deeds, it is only as examples of moral guidelines; thus you are meant to understand that we are referring to each & every ethical injunction.


[657]
DE ‘DRA BA’I TSUL KHRIMS DAG PA CAN DE NI, STON KA’I ZLA BA LA TSA GDUNG ZHI BAR BYED PA DANG, DKAR BA’I ‘OD KYIS LAM MER GNAS PA GNYIS YOD PA LTAR, RTAG TU TSUL KHRIMS RNAM PAR DAG PAR GNAS PA DE, DBANG PO’I SGO BSDAMS PA’I ZHI BA DANG, LAM MER GSAL BA’I LUS CAN GYI ‘OD CHAGS PAR DE DAG GIS RNAM PAR MDZES SO,,

A person who possesses an ethical way of life with this degree of purity is similar to the autumn moon, which displays two different qualities: the ability to put to rest the torment of extreme heat; and a radiance born of its ivory light.  Which is to say, a person who is always pure in their morality is made lovely both by their peacefulness—the fact that they are able to restrain the doors of their senses; and by their light—the radiance that seems to come from their body.



Additional causes of purity

	[658]
[II.3]
Sa hi svabhāvaṃ yadi śīla śuddheḥ
paśyeda taḥ syātsa na śuddha śīlaḥ,	
Ato bhavatyeṣa sadaiva samyak
traye’pi hīna dvaya dhī pracāraḥ.

,GAL TE DE NI KHRIMS DAG RANG BZHIN LTA,
,DE PHYIR DE NI TSUL KHRIMS DAG MI ‘GYUR,
,DE PHYIR DE NI RTAG TU GSUM CHAR LA’ANG,
,GNYIS BLO’I RGYU BA YANG DAG BRAL BAR ‘GYUR,

If they were to view
Following an ethical way of life purely
As something that existed by nature,
Then their ethics would no longer be pure.

Thus it is that they are always free
Of their mind running in duality
Towards any of the three.


[659]
BZHI PA NI, GANG GI PHYIR DGE SLONG KHA CIG SO THAR LAS BRTZAMS TE, TSUL KHRIMS CHES YONGS SU DAG PA YIN KYANG, GAL TE DE NI CHOS RNAMS LA RANG [f. 54b] BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR LTA BA MI SPONG NA, DE’I PHYIR RGYU MTSAN DES DGE SLONG DE TSUL KHRIMS DAG PAR MI ‘GYUR TE,

Here finally is the fourth division from above: a presentation of additional causes that make our ethical life totally pure.  Now there are certain monks who, with regard to the way in which they follow the vows of individual freedom, possess an ethical way of life which is incredibly pure.   And yet if a monk like this has failed to rid themselves of the viewpoint in which they think that objects exist through some nature of their own, then because of this—for this reason—that same monk’s observance of an ethical life would no longer be pure.


[660]
TSUL KHRIMS ‘CHAL BA TSUL KHRIMS DANG LDAN PA LTAR BCOS PA STE, DKON MCHOG BRTZEGS PA LAS, ‘OD SRUNGS ‘DI LA DGE SLONG KHA CIG TSUL KHRIMS DANG LDAN PA YIN TE, SO SOR THAR PA’I SDOM PAS BSDAMS SHING GNAS, CHO GA DANG SPYOD YUL PHUN SUM TSOGS PA,

That is, a person who has failed to live an ethical way of life is imitating someone who does live this way of life.  The Pile of Jewels explains this in a section beginning with:

O Kashyapa, there are some monks here who are following an ethical way of life; they keep their vows of individual freedom, and continue in this path.  Their observance of the proper rituals, and the things they engage in, are excellent.


[661]
KHA NA MA THO BA PHRA RAB RNAMS LA’ANG ‘JIGS PAR LTA BA, YANG DAG PAR BLANGS TE BSLAB PA’I GZHI RNAMS LA SLOB CING LUS DANG NGAG DANG, YID KYI LAS YONGS SU DAG PA DANG LDAN PAR GYUR PAS, ‘TSO BA YONGS SU DAG KYANG

They fear committing even the slightest reprehensible deed, and they do what they should, and well—that is, they verse themselves in the foundations of the training, and possess purity in every action of their body, speech, & mind.  And so the way they make their living is completely pure.  


[662]
DA {%DE in original from Kangyur} BDAG TU SMRA BA YIN TE, ‘OD SRUNGS DE NI TSUL KHRIMS ‘CHAL BA TSUL KHRIMS DANG LDAN PA LTAR BCOS PA DANG PO’O ZHES BYA BA NAS,

Nonetheless, they assert that things are themselves; this then, O Kashyapa, is the first way in which a person who is failing to live an ethical way of life seems to be following one—and is only imitating those who do.


[663]
‘OD SRUNGS GZHAN YANG ‘DI LA DGE SLONG KHA CIG SBYANGS PA’I YON TAN BCU GNYIS YANG DAG PAR BLANGS KYANG, DMIGS PAR LTA BA YIN TE NGAR ‘DZIN PA DANG NGA YIR ‘DZIN PA LA GNAS PA DE NI, ‘OD SRUNGS TSUL KHRIMS ‘CHAL BA TSUL KHRIMS DANG LDAN PA LTAR BCOS PA BZHI PA STE, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And it continues in this vein up to:

Moreover, O Kashyapa, a number of monks engage—very purely—in the twelve traditional practices of a monk.  And yet still they are looking at things; which is to say, they are still living in a way where they grasp to some kind of “me,” and some kind of “mine.”  This then, O Kashyapa, is the fourth way in which a person who is failing to live an ethical way of life seems to be following one—and is only imitating those who actually do.


[664]
BDAG TU SMRA BA NI DMIGS PAR LTA BA’O, ,DE YANG NGA DANG NGA YIR ‘DZIN PA LA GNAS PAS BSTAN TE, DE’I DON NI THUN MONG BA’I ‘JIG LTA LA MI BYA’I, NGA DANG NGA YI BA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA MI SPONG BA LA BYA’O,,

By the way, when the text here refers to a monk who “asserts that things are themselves,” it is actually referring to a monk who views things as being themselves.  This is as well what the words “they are still living in a way where they grasp to some kind of ‘me,’ and some kind of ‘mine’” are referring to: the point is that they have yet to rid themselves of the idea that they & theirs exist by definition.


[665]
DE NI ZHES PA BSHAD MA THAG PA LA SNYOG TU MI RUNG BAS,
,GAL TE RANG BZHIN TSUL KHRIMS RNAM DAG PAR,
,MTHONG NA DES DE TSUL [f. 55a] KHRIMS ‘CHAL BA YIN,
ZHES NAG TSOS DES DE ZHES BSGYUR BA LEGS SO,,

It’s important not to muddy the part [in the root text] following “they were”; as such, the way that Naktso has done the translation—saying “in this way then, they”—is preferable:

If they were to see
An ethical way of life
Which exists by nature as pure,

In this way then they’d fail
In this way of life.


[666]
DMIGS PA CAN GYI LTA BA MI SPONG NA TSUL KHRIMS MI DAG PA DE’I PHYIR, SA GNYIS PA BA DE NI, RTAG TU SEMS CAN GANG LA TSUL ‘CHAL SPONG BA DANG, SPONG GNYEN GANG ZHIG BYED PA DANG, GANG GIS SPONG BA GSUM CHAR LA’ANG DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS MED LA SOGS PA’I GNYIS KYI CHOS LA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR LTA BA’I GNYIS SU ‘DZIN PA’I BLO’I RGYU BA YANG DAG PAR BRAL BAR TE SPONG BAR BYED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If then we fail to rid ourselves of a point of view which still holds that there is something to view, then our attempt to follow an ethical way of life is no longer pure.  Thus it is, that a person at the second level is always “free of”—meaning, they have rid themselves of—their mind running in a way where it grasps to duality: where it looks upon dual divisions such as things which function & things which do not, and views them as existing by nature; and this applies to having this view towards any of the three of (1) the living beings towards whom one has rid themselves of failing to live an ethical way of life; (2) the spiritual antidote which one has employed to do so; and (3) the person who is ridding themselves of this failure.



An ethical life makes us pure

[667]
GNYIS PA LA LNGA, SBYIN ‘BRAS BDE ‘GROR SPYOD PA TSUL KHRIMS LA RAG LAS PA, SBYIN ‘BRAS LA SKYE BA BRGYUD MAR SPYOD PA TSUL KHRIMS LA RAG LAS PA, TSUL KHRIMS DANG BRAL NA NGAN ‘GRO LAS THAR PA SHIN TU DKA’ BAR BSTAN PA, SBYIN PA’I GTAM GYI RJES SU TSUL KHRIMS KYI GTAM MDZAD PA’I RGYU MTSAN, MNGON MTHO DANG NGES LEGS GNYIS KA’I RGYUR TSUL KHRIMS BSNGAGS PA’O,,

This brings us to our second part from above: a presentation of how, due to this ethical life, ones good qualities are totally pure.  Here there are five topics: how it is that enjoying the fruits of our acts of giving in a higher rebirth depends upon our following an ethical way of life; how enjoying the fruits of these acts in a succession of lifetimes depends upon following this same way of life; a presentation about how difficult it is to find freedom from the lower realms, if we lack an ethical way of life; the reason why leading an ethical life is discussed after the discussion of giving; and singing the praises of an ethical life, as the cause that brings us higher states and definite good.



Enjoying the fruits of giving
in the world beyond

	[668]
	[II.4]
Dānena bhogāḥ kugatāvapi syuḥ
śīla krama praskhalitasya jantoḥ,		
Sa lābha maulāya parikṣayāc ca
na tasya bhogāḥ punar udbhaveyuḥ.

[II.4a]
,SBYIN PAS LONGS SPYOD DAG NI ‘GRO NGAN NA’ANG,
,SKYE BO TSUL KHRIMS RKANG PA NYAMS LA ‘BYUNG,

When people who have practiced giving
Enjoy their wealth in a lower realm,

It’s because the legs of an ethical life
Have failed them.


[669]
DANG PO NI, DE LTAR BYANG SEMS KYI TSUL KHRIMS PHUN SUM TSOGS PA DANG LDAN PAR BRJOD NAS, DE’I ‘OG TU SPYIR DE LAS GZHAN PA’I TSUL KHRIMS PHUN SUM TSOGS KYANG, SBYIN SOGS LAS YON TAN SHIN TU CHE BA DANG, YON TAN PHUN TSOGS THAMS CAD KYI RTEN DU GYUR PAR STON PA NI,

Here then is the first.  Now that we have described how this bodhisattva possesses a truly excellent ethical life, we move on to explain how—generally speaking—additional forms of this excellent ethical life bring us even more magnificent personal qualities, through being combined with giving & the rest; and how this way of life provides a foundation for each & every high personal quality. 


[670]
SBYIN PA PO TSUL KHRIMS DANG LDAN PAS SBYIN PA BTANG BA LAS, LHA MI’I NANG DU KHYAD PAR DU ‘PHAGS PA’I LONGS SPYOD PHUN SUM TSOGS PA DAG ‘BYUNG RGYU

When someone who is following an ethical way of life engages in the practice of giving, this acts as a cause for them to enjoy excellent wealth—a truly superior form of wealth—within a rebirth among pleasure beings or humans.


[671]
DE NI, ‘GRO BA NGAN PA NGAN ‘GROR LHUNG BA’I NYI TSE BA’I [f. 55b] DMYAL BA DANG, BA LANG DANG RTA DANG GLANG PO CHE DANG SPRE’U DANG, KLU LA SOGS PA DANG YI DVAGS RDZU ‘PHRUL CHEN PO LA SOGS PAR SKYES PA LA, LONGS SPYOD PHUN SUM TSOGS PA SNA TSOGS PA ‘BYUNG BA NI, SKYE BO TSUL KHRIMS KYI RKANG PA NYAMS PA STE BRAL BA LAS ‘BYUNG NGO,,

But when this same practitioner must enjoy their excellent wealth within one of the lower rebirths—falling into the realms of misery; taking their birth for example within a hell on earth; or as a cow, or a horse, or an elephant; or as a water dragon or the like; or as a craving spirit possessed of miracle powers—then this is because “the legs of an ethical life have failed them”: meaning that they failed to follow this way of life.


[672]
DE NI TSUL KHRIMS DANG BRAL NA DES SBYIN PA BTANG BA’I ‘BRAS BU LONGS SPYOD RNAMS, BDE ‘GRO’I RTEN LA MI SMIN PAR NGAN ‘GRO’I RTEN LA SMIN PAR ‘GYUR BAR BSTAN PAS,

What’s being taught at this point is that—if a person like this has failed to follow the ethical life—then none of the wealth that they are to experience as a result of their practice of giving will come back to them in the body & mind of a being living in the higher realms; rather, it will come to them as they live in the form of a being living in the lower realms.


[673]
SBYIN ‘BRAS BDE ‘GRO’I RTEN LA SMIN PA CIG DGOS PAS DE ‘DOD NA, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SBYIN PA GTONG BA POS TSUL KHRIMS BSRUNG BAR BYA’O,,

What we need is for the fruits of our giving to come back to us in the body & mind of a person in the higher realms; and if they want that to happen, then the person that we described above—the person engaged in the practice of giving—must honor their moral code.



Keeping it going

	[674]
	[II.4b]
,BSKYED BCAS DNGOS ‘DU YONGS SU ZAD PAS NA,
,PHYIN CHAD DE LA LONGS SPYOD ‘BYUNG MI ‘GYUR,

When you splurge the accumulated capital
From which you are earning your interest,

You will having nothing more
That can bring you wealth later on.
			

[675]
GNYIS PA NI, TSUL KHRIMS DANG BRAL NA SBYIN ‘BRAS NGAN ‘GRO’I RTEN LA SMIN PA DANG, RTEN DE LA SNGAR GYI SBYIN PA’I ‘BRAS BU LONGS SPYOD PA TZAM YIN GYI,

Here next is our second point from above: how enjoying the fruits of these acts of giving in a succession of lifetimes depends upon continuing to follow an ethical way of life.  If we fail to follow an ethical life, then the fruits of our giving will come back to us as we live in the body & mind of a being in the lower realms; and in this body & mind we will enjoy nothing more than the wealth which results from the giving we did in our former body & mind.


[676]
SHIN TU BLUN PAS GSAR DU SBYIN SOGS SGRUB PA MED PA’I PHYIR, SKYED DANG BCAS PA’I DNGOS PO ‘DU BA STE RTZA BA LA SPYAD PAS YONGS SU ZAD PAS NA, SNGON GYI SBYIN ‘BRAS MA LUS PA LONGS SPYOD PA PHYIN CHAD NAS GANG ZAG DE LA LONGS SPYOD ‘BYUNG BAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

And then—since in our new circumstances our mind is so foolish—we will follow none of the practices of giving & the rest.  That is, we will splurge the accumulated capital from which we are earning our interest: we will use up all our equity.  A person like this enjoys every one of the fruits of our previous acts of giving, and then later on they have nothing more that can bring them any wealth.


[677]
DE NI DPER NA SA BON NYUNG DU {%NGU?} BTAB PA LAS, ‘BRAS BU RGYA CHEN PO RNYED PA’I MI DE SLAR YANG ‘BRAS BU’I CHED DU, DE BAS KYANG CHES MANG BA’I SA BON ‘DEBS PA NI, ‘BRAS BU’I TSOGS CHEN PO ‘PHEL BAS MA CHAD PA YOD KYI,

To present this in terms of a metaphor, suppose there is a person who plants a small seed, and from it gains major fruits.  And then, in order to enjoy even further fruits, they plant massive amounts of the resulting seeds.  The multiplication of masses of fruits then continues in an ever-increasing upward cycle.


[678]
GANG ZHIG BLUN PO NYID KYIS SA BON TZAM YANG MI ‘DEBS PAR LONGS SPYOD PA LA NI, ‘BRAS BU MA CHAD PAR ‘PHEL BA MED PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

But someone who is nothing more than a fool refuses to replant even a single seed; and so their wealth never increases at all—for them, there is none of this ever-increasing upward cycle.



Freedom from the lower realms
is impossible

	[679]
	[II.5]
Svatantra vṛttiḥ samasa sthitaś ca
bibharti nātmānamayaṃ tadā cet,
Prapātayātaḥ paratantra vṛtti
stataḥ samutthāsyati kena bhūyaḥ.

,GANG TSE RANG DBANG ‘JUG CING MTHUN GNAS PA,
,GAL TE ‘DI BDAG ‘DZIN PAR MI BYED NA,
,G-YANG SAR LHUNG BAS GZHAN DBANG ‘JUG ‘GYUR BA,
,DE LAS PHYI NAS GANG GIS SLONG BAR ‘GYUR,

Suppose a person
Who is free to do whatever they want
In a land that suits all their needs
Cannot restrain themselves;

They will fall into the abyss,
Living under the will of others.

And then later
Who could ever get them out?


[680]
GSUM PA NI, TSUL [f. 56a] KHRIMS KYI RKANG PA CHAG PAS LONGS SPYOD RGYUN PAR ‘PHEL BA RNYED DKA’ BA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, NGAN ‘GROR SONG BAS NGAN ‘GRO NAS THON PA YANG SHIN TU RNYED DKA’O, ZHES STON PA NI,

Here is the third point from above, a presentation about how difficult it is to find freedom from the lower realms, if we lack an ethical way of life.  The next lines of the root text are describing how difficult it is, for a person whose ethical legs are broken, to achieve not only an upward cycle of ever-increasing wealth; but how infinitely more difficult it is for them to manage to get themselves out of the lower births, once they have gone there.


[681]
GANG GI TSE DPA’ BO MTHUN PA’I YUL NA GNAS PA, ‘CHING BA LAS GROL BA LTAR, GZHAN LA RAG MA LUS PAR RANG GI ‘DOD PAS RANG DBANG DU ‘JUG CING,

Suppose then there is a warrior—one who is living in a land that suits all their needs; a warrior who has freed themselves of the chains that they wore before.  They are free to do whatever they want to do—anything their heart desires—without being dependent on anyone else.


[682]
MTHUN PA’I YUL LHA MI’I ‘GRO BA NA GNAS PA NA, GAL TE GANG ZAG ‘DI BDAG NYID NGAN ‘GROR LTUNG BA LAS ‘DZIN PAR MI BYED NA, DPA’ BO BCINGS NAS RI SUL CHEN POR BSKYUR BA LTAR, NGAN ‘GRO’I G-YANG SAR LHUNG BAS RANG LA DBANG MED PAR GZHAN DBANG GIS ‘JUG PA’I TSE, NGAN ‘GROR SONG BA DE LAS PHYI NAS TE DA GZOD GANG GIS SLONG BAR BYED DE DE LTAR BYED PA MED DO,,

Now suppose there is a person who is living in the realms of pleasure beings and humans, but who cannot restrain themselves from dropping to the lower realms: they will fall into the abyss of the lands of misery then—as if the warrior were put back into his chains and thrown off a high cliff.  Now they live under the will of others, with no freedom to do as they choose.  And then later on, after this point, who could ever get them out of the lower realms they had fallen into?  It would be impossible.


[683]
NGAN ‘GRO’I RTEN LA NI DGE BA SGRUB PA SHIN TU DKON LA, SDIG PA SOG PA LA SHIN TU THU BAS NA, NGAN ‘GRO KHO NAR BRGYUD DGOS SO,,

It is extremely rare for a person who possesses the body & mind of a being in the lower realms to accomplish any good deeds at all; their tendency to accumulate even more negative deeds is infinitely worse, and so they enter a downward cycle, which keeps them only in these realms of misery.


[684]
DE NYID KYI PHYIR MDO SDE LAS KYANG, BRGYA LA GAL TE MI RNAMS KYI NANG DU SKYES NA YANG, RNAM PAR SMIN PA GNYIS SGRUB STE, ZHES MIR SKYE BA DKA’ BAR GSUNGS SO,,

This is exactly why the sutras describe how difficult it is to be born as a human being, in lines like—

Even in the remote chance
That they are born among humans,

Their previous deeds
Will come back to them in two ways…


[685]
DES NA DA LTA NAS RANG NYID NGAN ‘GROR MI LTUNG BAR GZUNG DGOS LA, DE YANG TSUL KHRIMS LA ‘BAD PA BYED PA YIN PAR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

Thus it is that we must—from this very moment—hold ourselves back from falling into the realms of misery; and you must realize that, to do this, you must make great efforts in maintaining an ethical way of life.



Why ethics are discussed after giving


	[686]
[II.6]
Ato Jino dāna kathāṃ vidhāya
śīlānvayā eva kathāś cakāra,		
Śīla kṣitāveva guṇā vivṛddhā
bhavantyavicchinna phalopabhogāḥ.

,DE PHYIR RGYAL BAS SBYIN PA’I GTAM MDZAD NAS,
,TSUL KHRIMS RJES ‘GRO’I GTAM NYID MDZAD PA YIN,
,YON TAN TSUL KHRIMS ZHING DU RNAM ‘PHEL NA,
,’BRAS BU NYER SPYOD CHAD PA MED PAR ‘GYUR,

This is why the Victorious Ones,
When they had discussed the act of giving,
Then afterwards discussed none other than
Living an ethical way of life.

If high personal qualities flourish
In the garden of an ethical life,
The fruits of wealth
Will never be interrupted.


[687]
,BZHI PA NI, GANG GI PHYIR TSUL KHRIMS ‘CHAL BA NI NGAN ‘GROR ‘KHRID PA SOGS NYES PA DU MA’I GNAS SU GYUR PA DE’I PHYIR, SDIG PA MTHA’ DAG PHAM PAR MDZAD PA’I RGYAL BAS, SBYIN [f. 56b] PA LA SOGS PA’I YON TAN CHUD MI ZA BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR SBYIN PA’I GTAM MDZAD NAS, DE’I MJUG THOGS SU TSUL KHRIMS SBYIN PA’I RJES SU ‘GRO BA STE SGRUB PA’I GTAM NYID MDZAD PA YIN NO,,

This brings us to our fourth point from above: the reason why leading an ethical life is discussed after the discussion of giving.  And so when a person fails in leading an ethical life, they incur many problems—such as this failure leading them to the lower realms.  This then is why the Victorious Ones, who have won the war against each & every negative deed, discussed the act of giving, and then subsequent to this—afterwards—completed a discussion of nothing other than living an ethical way of life: the point is that they wanted to assure that the good qualities created by giving & the rest were not ruined.


[688]
DE’I RGYU MTSAN NI YON TAN THAMS CAD KYI RTEN DU GYUR PA’I PHYIR TSUL KHRIMS NYID ZHING NGO,,

And the reason for this is that an ethical life—and only an ethical life—acts as the garden for each & every one of our high personal qualities: it is the foundation for all of them.


[689]
ZHING DER SBYIN SOGS KYI YON TAN RNAMS RNAM PAR ‘PHEL NA, RGYU SBYIN SOGS DANG ‘BRAS BU LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD BZANG PO LA NYE BAR SPYOD PA’I BRGYUD PA GONG NAS GONG DU RNAM PAR CHAD PA MED PA’I SGO NAS, ‘BRAS BU’I TSOGS ‘PHEL ZHING DUS RING POR LONGS SPYOD PAR NUS KYI, DE LAS GZHAN DU NA DE LTAR MI NUS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It being the case that the high qualities of giving & the rest flourish in this particular garden, then it is in this way that we can see the causes—giving & the rest; and their fruits—a constant upward cycle of the enjoyment of a wonderful body and wealth: a cycle which is never interrupted, and where one is able to enjoy, for a very long time, an ever-increasing mass of the results of their generosity.  But if we do not follow this code, then these things will never be able to happen.


[690]
DES NI SBYIN PA GTONG BA RNAMS KYIS SBYIN ‘BRAS KYI LONGS SPYOD PHUN TSOGS ‘BYUNG BA KHO NA’I RTZIS MI GTANG BAR, LONGS SPYOD DE LA GANG GIS SPYOD PA’I LUS RTEN PHUN TSOGS KYI RTZIS DANG, LONGS SPYOD DE SKYE BA DU MAR ‘ONG BA’I RTZIS KYANG GTANG DGOS LA, DE’I THABS KYANG TSUL KHRIMS SRUNG BA SHIN TU GAL CHE BAR SHAS {%SHES} DGOS ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

The point of all this is to indicate that those who engage in the act of giving should not only take into consideration the great things that happen with the wealth that comes to them as the fruits of their generosity; rather, they should also consider how great the body in which they enjoy this wealth should be, and how they can keep this wealth going many lifetimes into the future.  Our author wants to make very sure that we understand that maintaining an ethical way of life is absolutely critical as a method for achieving these goals.


[691]
BYANG SEMS LAS DANG PO PAS KYANG SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR SBYIN PA GTONG BA LA BRTZON DGOS LA, DE YANG CHED DU BYA BA SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON DU, SANGS RGYAS THOB PA’I DON DU DMIGS TE BYED DGOS MOD KYANG, GNAS SKABS SU BDE ‘GRO’I RTEN LA SBYIN ‘BRAS SMIN PA DGOS PA DANG, DE YANG SKYE BA DU MAR ‘BYUNG DGOS LA, DE NI TSUL KHRIMS LA RAG LAS PA RNAMS ‘DRA STE, DE MED NA BYANG SEMS KYI SPYOD PA LA [f. 57a] SLOB PA’I MTHUN RKYEN MI TSANG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

People who are just starting out on the way of the bodhisattva have to make great efforts, as we described earlier, in the act of giving.  Admittedly they should be focused on the goal of achieving Buddhahood; and on doing so for specific beneficiaries—every single living being there is.  Nonetheless, there is the immediate goal that the fruits of their acts of giving should ripen for them as they live in the body & mind of a being in the higher realms.  Moreover, this circumstance should repeat itself over & over, for many lifetimes.  All this again depends upon the beginner bodhisattva leading an ethical way of life; if they fail to do so, then they will not enjoy the entire set of conditions which are conducive for training themselves in the path of the bodhisattva.



A song to the ethical life

	[692]
[II.7]
Pṛthagjanānām atha ghoṣajānāṃ
pratyekabodhau niyatātmanāṃ ca,
Jinātmajānāṃ ca paraṃ na śīlān
niḥśreyasāyābhyudayāya cāsti.

,SO SO’I SKYE BO RNAMS DANG GSUNG SKYES DANG,
,RANG BYANG CHUB LA BDAG NYID NGES RNAMS DANG,
,RGYAL SRAS RNAMS KYI NGES PAR LEGS PA DANG,
,MNGON MTHO’I RGYU NI TSUL KHRIMS LAS GZHAN MED,

Other than an ethical way of life,
There is no cause
That can bring normal beings,

And those born of the holy words,
And those who have confirmed
Themselves in their enlightenment,
And the sons & daughters of the Victors

The achievement of definite good
And the higher realms of life.


[693]
LNGA PA NI, BDE ‘GRO’I LUS DANG RTEN DE LA SBYIN ‘BRAS YUN RING DU SPYOD PA GNYIS KA TSUL KHRIMS LA RAG LAS SHING, DE NYID NGES LEGS ‘THOB PA LA YANG MED MI RUNG YIN PA’I PHYIR NA, 

Which brings us to our fifth and final point from above: singing the praises of an ethical life, as the cause that brings us higher states & definite good.  Both of these things—the body & mind of a being in the higher realms, enjoying the results of their giving for a very long length of time—depend upon following an ethical way of life.  This single way of life is as well a sine qua non for attaining definite good.


[694]
TSUL ‘DIS SO SO SKYE BO LAM MA ZHUGS RNAMS KYI MNGON MTHO’I RGYU DANG, THUB PA’I GSUNG LAS SKYES PA NYAN THOS RNAMS DANG, RANG RGYAL GYI BYANG CHUB KYI LAM DU BDAG NYID NGES PA RNAMS DANG, RGYAL SRAS BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYI NGES PAR LEGS PA BYANG CHUB KYI RGYU NI, TSUL KHRIMS LAS GZHAN MED DO,,

It is this way of life which brings normal beings—that is, those who have yet to enter one of the paths—to the higher realms of life.  And other than an ethical way of life, there is no cause that can bring the achievement of definite good to those on the listener track—“those born of the holy words” of the Able Ones; and to those on the track of the self-made buddhas (“those who have confirmed themselves in their enlightenment”); and to those on the bodhisattva track: “the sons & daughters of the Victors.”


[695]
DE’I DON NI TSUL KHRIMS KHO NA RGYU YIN ZHES RGYU GZHAN GCOD PA NI MIN TE, TSUL KHRIMS MIN PA’I RGYU GZHAN DU MA YOD PA’I PHYIR RO, ,DES NA MNGON MTHO KHYAD PAR CAN DANG NGES LEGS ‘GRUB PA LA TSUL KHRIMS DANG NGES PAR ‘BREL BA DGOS KYI, DE DOR NA GTAN MI ‘GRUB PA’I DON NO,,

When we say here that “only an ethical way of life is the cause,” the point by the way is not to disallow any other practice as the cause; for there are many other causes here other than the ethical life.  The idea is thus that one must definitely have an intimate connection with an ethical way of life in order to achieve an exceptional form of a being in the higher realms; and to achieve definite good.


[696]
‘DI YANG SA BCU PA’I MDO LAS, SROG GCOD SOGS KYI MI DGE BA BCU PO RE RE LA CHEN PO DANG ‘BRING DANG, CHUNG NGUR PHYE BA’I RE RES RIM PA BZHIN DU DMYAL BA DANG, DUD ‘GRO DANG YI DVAGS SU ‘KHRID PA DANG,

Here is a summary of how The Sutra on the Ten Levels treats these points.  It divides each of the ten negative deeds of killing & the rest into greater, medium, and lesser degrees, describing how they lead a person—respectively—to a rebirth as a hell being, an animal, or a craving spirit.


[697]
MTHAR GAL TE MI’I NANG DU SKYES NA SROG GCOD KYIS TSE THUNG BA DANG NAD MANG BA GNYIS DANG, LHAG MA DGU’I RE RES KYANG MI ‘DOD PA GNYIS GNYIS SGRUB PA DANG, DGE BCUS NI ‘DOD PA’I LHA DANG MIR SKYE BA NAS SRID RTZE’I BAR DU SKYE BA DANG,

The sutra then explains how—even if in the end we are born among human beings—the killing we have done creates a life which has two undesirable results: a shortened lifespan, and many diseases.  It goes on to describe two such unwanted consequences for each of the remaining nine negative deeds.  Performing the ten positive deeds leads us to a birth among the pleasure beings and humans of the desire realm, all the way up to the level known as “Peak of Existence.”


[698]
DE’I GONG MAR DGE BCU ‘DI DAG RANG GCIG PU’I DON LA DMIGS PA’I NYI TSE BA’I SEMS DANG, ‘KHOR [f. 57b] BA LA SKRAG PA’I YID ‘BYUNG BA DANG BCAS SHING, SNYING RJE CHEN PO MED PA DANG GZHAN GYI SGRA’I RJES SU ‘BRANG BA’I BDAG MED RTOGS PA’I SHES RAB KYI RNAM PAS SBYANGS NA, NYAN THOS KYI THEG PAS NGES PAR ‘BYUNG BAR BYED DO,,

Above & beyond this, there is a half-complete motivation which focuses upon doing the ten good deeds for ones own purposes—where one possesses thoughts of renunciation, a healthy fear for the cycle of life.  At this point the person lacks great compassion, although they have trained themselves in the form of the wisdom which perceives that nothing is itself—but where this understanding is only following another person’s description of it.  That is, a person like this has come to a weariness for the cycle of life, through the teachings of the listener track.


[699]
DE’I GONG MAR SRID PA THA MA PA’I TSE GZHAN GYI DRING MI ‘JOG PA DANG, RANG SANGS RGYAS KYI BYANG CHUB LA DMIGS PA DANG, SNYING RJE CHEN PO DANG, THABS LA MKHAS PA MED PA DANG, RTEN ‘BREL ZAB MO’I DE KHO NA NYID KHONG DU CHUD PAS SBYANGS NA, RANG RGYAL GYI THEG PAS NGES PAR ‘BYUNG BAR BYED DO,,

Above & beyond this, there is the type of practitioner who is in their last suffering life, and who has no need to credit the words of others.  They are focused upon the enlightenment of a self-made buddha; and they still lack great compassion, and the capacity for skillful means.  And they train themselves in suchness as it is expressed in the teachings on dependent events; thus they have come to their weariness for the cycle of life through the teachings of the track of the self-made buddha.


[700]
DE’I GONG MAR SHIN TU RGYA CHE ZHING SHIN TU TSAD MED PA’I SNYING BRTZE BA DANG, SNYING RJE DANG LDAN PA DANG, THABS LA MKHAS PAS BSDUS PA DANG, SMON LAM RLABS CHEN PO BTAB PA DANG, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD MI GTONG BA DANG, SANGS RGYAS KYI YE SHES SHIN TU RGYAS PA LA DMIGS PAS SBYANGS NA, BYANG SEMS KYI SA YONGS SU DAG PA DANG, PHAR PHYIN DAG PA’I SPYOD PA RGYA CHEN PO ‘GRUB PAR BYED PAR GSUNGS PA’I DON BSDUS PA’O,,

Above & beyond this, there is the type of practitioner who combines a love which is extraordinarily vast and more than immeasurable; compassion; and skillful means.  They have made prayers of powerful efficacy; they will never give up working for each & every living being there is; and they have trained themselves by focusing upon the boundless wisdom of a Buddha.  As such, concludes the sutra, they attain a place where their practice of the bodhisattva levels is completely pure—a way of life where they follow a vast & pure practice the perfections.


[701]
BSHES SPRING LAS KYANG,
,KHYOD KYIS TSUL KHRIMS MA NYAMS MOD MI DMA’,
,MA ‘DRES MA SPAGS {%SBAGS} PA DAG BSTEN PAR MDZOD,
,KHRIMS NI RGYU DANG MI RGYU’I SA BZHIN DU,
,YON TAN KUN GYI GZHI RTEN LEGS {%LAGS} PAR GSUNGS,
ZHES TSUL KHRIMS LA SLOB PA GAL CHE BAR GSUNGS SO,,

The Letter to a Friend describes the great importance of leading an ethical way of life as follows:

Needless to say,
You should keep an ethical
Way of life, and never lose it;

But neither should it ever slip,
Or be compromised, or polluted.

For they have stated that this way of life
Provides the foundation
For all good qualities you could ever have—

Just as the surface of this great Earth itself
Holds up all the things that be,
Moving or standing still.


[702]
DES NA SKABS SA GNYIS PA’I SKABS SU GSUNGS KYANG, BYED PA BYANG SEMS LAS DANG PO PAS KYANG BYA DGOS PA NI, MI DGE BA BCU LA KUN SLONG NAS KYANG MI RGYU BAR SDOM SEMS BSTEN PA’I SDOM PA’I [f. 58a] TSUL KHRIMS NI SHIN TU GAL CHE BAR,

Now the point in time that the text speaks of may be the juncture at which one is on the second bodhisattva level; but the action described is one that even beginning bodhisattvas should be engaged in.  The point is that it is crucial that we never move towards the ten negative deeds even in our intentions: we must follow a form of vowed morality, relying constantly on the intention to restrain ourselves.


[703]
SBYIN PAS LONGS SPYOD DAG NI, ZHES PA NAS, TSUL KHRIMS LAS GZHAN MED, CES PA’I BAR GYIS BSTAN PA LTAR SEMS PA DANG, TSUL KHRIMS LA SLOB RES KYIS MI DMIGS PAR RTOGS PA’I SHES RAB KYIS ZIN PA LA SBYANG DGOS LA,

The idea—expressed in the lines of the root text from “When people who have practiced giving…” up to “…the higher realms of life”—is that we must practice in such a way that our state of mind, and every individual instance in our pursuit of the ethical way of life, is imbued with the wisdom which realizes that there is nothing to see.


[704]
DE YANG GO BA TZAM DANG LAN ‘GA’ ZUNG TZAM GOMS PAS NI GAR YANG MI PHYIN PAS, RGYUN LDAN DU DON DE RNAMS SEMS DGOS SO,,

We should also say that—if one depends on no more than a rough understanding of how this works, or only brings it to mind occasionally—then you won’t get anywhere at all.  You have to think about these points on a constant basis.


[705]
RGYUN LDAN DU GOMS NA BYANG SEMS KYI SPYOD PA LA SLOB TSUL DANG PO THOS PA NA’ANG YID LA GDUNG BA SKYED PA DANG, STON PAS KYANG YUN RING PO’I BAR DU SKU NYAMS SU BZHES PAR MI NUS PA RNAMS LA YANG, BLO RANG GI NGANG GIS ‘JUG PA CIG ‘ONG NGO,,

If you do think of them continually, then your heart will ache with longing when you hear even the most basic teachings about how to follow the bodhisattva’s way of life; and there will come a time when your thoughts slide all of their own into practices that even the Teacher himself was unable for a very long time to follow.


[706]
DE LTAR YANG YON TAN MTHA’ YAS PAR BSTOD PA LAS,
,GANG ZHIG THOS PAR GYUR NA’ANG 
‘JIG RTEN ‘DI LA GNOD PA SKYE ‘GYUR DANG,
,GANG YANG KHYOD NYID KYIS KYANG
YUN RING SKU NYAMS BZHES PAR MI SPYOD PA’I,
,SPYOD PA DE DAG KHYOD LA
GOMS PAS DUS SU RANG GI NGANG NYID ‘GYUR,
,DE SLAD YON TAN DAG NI
YONGS GOMS MA BGYIS SPEL BAR DKA’ BA LAGS,
ZHES SO,,

This same idea is expressed in A Praise of the Good Qualities as Infinite:

There are teachings
That people of the world
Flinch just to hear of;

There are practices
That even You could not follow
After trying for years & years;

But in time,
As You got used to them,
They became second nature.

And so it is
That without constant practice
High qualities are difficult to build.



We cannot coexist

	[707]
[II.8]
Yathā samudraḥ kuṇapena sārdhaṃ
yathā ca lakṣmīḥ saha kālakarṇyā,
Tathādhiśīle’dhikṛto mahatma
na vāsaman vicchati tad vipattyā.

,JI LTAR RGYA MTSO RO DANG LHAN CIG DANG,
,BKRA SHIS RNA NAG MA DANG LHAN CIG BZHIN,
,DE LTAR TSUL KHRIMS DBANG BYAS BDAG NYID CHE,
,DE ‘CHAL BA DANG LHAN CIG GNAS MI ‘DOD,

A corpse cannot coexist
With the great ocean;

The auspicious cannot coexist
With something which is ill-starred.

Just so, someone who is a great being
By virtue of their ethical life

Would never want to associate
With someone who has failed
To follow this way of life.


[708]
GSUM PA NI, JI LTAR TE DPER NA RGYA MTSO CHEN PO NI KLU GTZANG SBRA CAN RNAMS GNAS PA’I MTHUS, RO GANG YIN RLANGS {%RLABS} KYIS PHYI ROL TU ‘PHEN PAS, RO DANG LHAN CIG TU MI ‘GROGS PA DANG,

Here is our third part from before: the presentation of a metaphor to describe how—at this level—ones ethical life is beyond any adulteration by the things that could work against it.  Because water dragons of great personal cleanliness reside within it, the waves of the sea will eject back onto the beach any corpse which is thrown into the water; that is, a corpse cannot coexist with the great ocean.


[709]
BKRA SHIS PA’I PHUN TSOGS DANG, RNA NAG MA STE BKRA MI SHIS PA GNYIS LHAN CIG TU ME {%MI} ‘GROGS PA DE LTAR TE

And something which is perfectly auspicious cannot coexist with something which is ill-starred; that is, with something which is inauspicious.


[710]
DE BZHIN DU, TSUL KHRIMS YONGS SU DAG PAS [f. 58b] DBANG DU BYAS PA’I BDAG NYID CHEN PO SA GNYIS PA BA DE, TSUL KHRIMS ‘CHAL BA DANG LHAN CIG TU GNAS PAR MI ‘DOD DO,,

Just so, someone who is a great being by virtue of the total purity of their ethical life—that is, someone at the second bodhisattva level—would never want to associate with someone who has failed to follow this way of life.


[711]
BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, BKRA SHIS MA GANG DU ZHUGS PA’I KHYIM DU RNA NAG MA YANG GDON MI ZA BAR YOD DO, ,ZHES GSUNGS PA DANG ‘DIR BSHAD PA GNYIS MI ‘GAL TE, DER NI MING DE DANG LDAN PA’I GANG ZAG GNYIS LA DGONGS LA, ‘DIR NI RNA NAG MA ZHES PA BKRA MI SHIS PA’I MING YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now it is true that the commentary to The 400 Verses says that “You will find Ill-Starred in the home where Auspicious lives—there is no doubt about it.”  There is no contradiction though between this and what we’ve just described.  And this is because that text is intended to refer to two people whose names are “Ill-Starred” and “Auspicious”; whereas in this case “ill-starred” is just another name for “inauspicious.”
	


Two kinds of ethics

	[712]
[II.9]
Yāṃ yaś ca yebhyo viratiṃ karoti
trayopalambhe sati vai niruktam,
Laukikyadaḥ pāramiteti śīlam
lokottarā tat traya saṅga śūnyam.

,GANG GIS GANG ZHIG GANG LA SPONG BYED PA,
,GSUM DU DMIGS PA YOD NA TSUL KHRIMS DE,
,’JIG RTEN PA YI PHA ROL PHYIN ZHES BSHAD,
,GSUM LA CHAGS PAS STONG DE ‘JIG RTEN ‘DAS,

An ethical way of life
Where you see them as three—

The one who gives them up,
The ones that they give up,
And the one towards whom
They give them up—

Is one that we call
A “perfection of the world.”

And it is beyond the world
Where this way of life is empty
Of attachment to these three.
					

[713]
BZHI PA NI, GANG ZAG GANG GIS SPONG BA DANG, SPANG BYA GANG ZHIG SPONG BA DANG, SEMS CAN GANG LA SPONG BAR BYED PA’I ‘KHOR GSUM DU BDEN PAR DMIGS PA’I SA BON ‘GOG MI NUS PA YOD NA,

Next is the fourth part from above: a presentation of the divisions of the perfection of an ethical life.  Suppose a person is unable to put a stop to the mental seeds that cause them to see things as the three spheres—the one who gives up negative actions; the negative actions that they give up; and the person towards whom they give up these actions—as existing in truth.  


[714]
DE ‘DRA BA’I TSUL KHRIMS ‘JIG RTEN PA’I PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA ZHES BSHAD LA, TSUL KHRIMS DE NYID SNGAR BSHAD PA’I ‘KHOR GSUM DU BDEN PAR DMIGS PA’I CHAGS PAS STONG PA STE MI DMIGS PAR RTOGS PA’I ZAG MED KYI SHES RAB KYIS ZIN NA, ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA YIN PAS TSUL KHRIMS LA GNYIS KYI DBYE BA YOD DO,,

This is the kind of ethical way of life that we call “a perfection of the world.”  Suppose though that this same way of life is empty of attachment—in the form of seeing the three spheres we mentioned before as existing in truth; that is, suppose this lifestyle is imbued with immaculate wisdom, where we have realized that these things are non-existent.  This then is a perfection which is beyond the world—and so there is a division of ethics into two.



Harvest moon

	[715]
[II.10]
Iyam api vimalā malavyapetā
śaradi niśākara candrikā yathaiva,
Apaharati jane mano nidāghaṃ
Jina tanayendu bhavābhavā bhavaśrīḥ.

,RGYAL SRAS ZLA BA LAS BYUNG SRID MIN SRID PA YI,
,DPAL GYUR DRI MA DANG [f. 203a] BRAL DRI MA MED ‘DI YANG,
,STON KHA’I DUS KYI ZLA BA’I ‘OD NI JI BZHIN DU,
,’GRO BA’I YID KYI GDUNG BA SEL BAR BYED PA YIN,

The light that comes from the moon
Of this child of the Victorious Ones
Is the glory of the cycle of pain,

Without being the cycle of pain—
It is immaculate, free of every stain [f. 203a].

Like the light of the moon
In the days of autumn,
It banishes the painful heat
In the minds of living beings.
					


[716]
LNGA PA NI, JI LTAR STON KA’I DUS KYI ZLA ‘OD DRI MA DANG BRAL BAS, SKYE BO’I GDUNG BA SEL BA JI BZHIN DU, RGYAL BA’I SRAS SA GNYIS PA BA’I ZLA BA LAS BYUNG BA’I ‘CHAL KHRIMS KYI DRI MA DANG BRAL BA’I TSUL KHRIMS KYI ‘OD DANG LDAN PAS,

Here is the fifth & final part from above: a concluding summary of this level, accomplished by describing its high qualities.  Think of the light of the moon in the days of autumn, free of every stain; and how it banishes the painful heat for the people it touches.  The light that comes from the moon of this child of the Victorious Ones who is at the second bodhisattva level is like that other light, for it consists of an ethical way of life which is free of every kind of the stain that we find in a person who has failed to follow this ethical way.


[717]
SA GNYIS PA DRI MA MED PA ZHES PA’I MTSAN DON DANG LDAN PA ‘DI YANG, ‘CHAL BA’I TSUL KHRIMS KYIS BSKYED PA’I ‘GRO BA’I YID KYI GDUNG BA SEL BAR BYED PA YIN NO,,

As such, this bodhisattva possesses not only the name of the second level—Immaculate—but the meaning of the name as well; and their light banishes the painful heat produced in the minds of living beings by all those times they have failed to follow an ethical way of life.


[718]
SA GNYIS PA BA ‘DI NI ‘KHOR [f. 59a] BAR ‘KHOR BA’I KHONGS SU MI GTOGS PAS SRID PA ‘KHOR BA MIN YANG, SRID PA YI DPAL YIN TE, YON TAN PHUN SUM TSOGS PA THAMS CAD BYANG SEMS DE’I RJES SU ‘GRO BA’I PHYIR DANG, SEMS CAN GYI DON DU SMON LAM GYI DBANG GIS GLING BZHI LA DBANG BA’I ‘KHOR SGYUR GYI RGYU PHUL DU BYUNG BA THOB PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This bodhisattva at the second level is not included among those who are spinning in the cycle of pain.  Without being the cycle of pain then, the light that comes from them is nonetheless the glory of this cycle.  This is because each & every most excellent personal quality follows behind this bodhisattva; and because—due to the power of the prayers they have made for the sake of every living being—they have attained the most glorious cause to become a wheel emperor, ruling over all the four continents of this world.


	[719]
	[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, SEMS BSKYED PA GNYIS PA’O,,

This concludes the second wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
of Entering the Middle Way.


[720]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA GNYIS PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

This concludes our explanation of the second ultimate “wish for enlightenment,” or chapter, of An Illumination of the True Thought, an expanded explanation of Entering the Middle Way.






Chapter 3
Shining


Chapter 3
Shining

[721]
,,GSUM PA SA GSUM PA ‘OD BYED PA BSHAD PA LA BZHI, KHYAD PAR GYI GZHI SA’I NGES TSIG ,KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS SA’I YON TAN, PHAR PHYIN DANG PO GSUM GYI KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS, SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS MJUG BSDU BA’O,,

Here is the third major divison from above—an explanation of Shining, the third bodhisattva level.  This we cover in four parts: the literal meaning of the name of what possesses the qualities we will describe—that is, the name of the bodhisattva level; the qualities we will describe—the high qualities of this level; typical features of the first three perfections; and a concluding summary of this level, accomplished by describing its high qualities.



The fire of wisdom

	[722]
	[III.1]
Prabhākarī bhūmir iyaṃ tṛtīyā
niḥśeṣa bodhyendhana dāhino’gneḥ,
Prabhodayāt tāmra ivāvabhāso
raverivāsyāṃ sugatātmajasya.

,SHES BYA’I BUD SHING MA LUS SREG PA’I ME’I,
,’OD ‘BYUNG PHYIR NA SA NI GSUM PA ‘DI,
,’OD BYED PA STE BDE GSHEGS SRAS PO LA,
,DE TSE NYI LTAR ZANGS ‘DRA’I SNANG BA ‘BYUNG,

This third of the bodhisattva levels
Is called “Shining,”

Because of the light given off
By the fire that burns
Every stick of the firewood
Of all the things you can know.

At this point, a light
Of a copper color, like that of the sun,
Shines forth from the child
Of Those Who Have Gone to Bliss.


[723]
DANG PO NI, BYANG SEMS KYI SA NI GSUM PA ‘DI LA NI, ‘OD BYED PA ZHES BYA’O, ,CI’I PHYIR ‘OD BYED PA ZHES BYA ZHE NA, DE NI MTSAN DON DANG MTHUN PA YIN TE, SA GSUM PA THOB PA DE’I TSE SHES BYA’I BUD SHING MA LUS PA SREG PA’I YE SHES KYI ME GNYIS SNANG GI SPROS PA KUN, MNYAM GZHAG TU ZHI BAR BYED NUS PA’I BDAG NYID CAN GYI ‘OD ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here is the first.  This third of the bodhisattva levels is called “Shining.”  Why do we give it this name?  Because what is happening at this level fits the meaning of the name.  That is—at this point, when a person attains the third level—there is a light given off by a fire whose nature is that it has the power, during a period of deep meditation, to put an end to all elaborations of duality: a fire which burns every stick of the firewood of all the things you can know.


[724]
DE YANG SEMS GSUM PA BSKYED PA’I BDE BAR GSHEGS PA’I SRAS PO DE LA SA GSUM PA DE’I TSE, NYI MA ‘CHAR LA KHAD PA’I DUS SU, ZANGS ‘DRA BA’I SNANG BA ‘BYUNG BA LTAR BYANG SEMS ‘DI LA YANG YE SHES KYI SNANG BA ‘BYUNG NGO,,

That is—at this point, at the third level, when the child of Those Who Have Gone to Bliss has managed to give rise to this very level—the light of wisdom shines forth from this bodhisattva, a light of the color of copper, like the one we see when the sun is about to rise.


[725]
‘DI NI SA DER RJES THOB TU ‘OD [f. 59b] DMAR PO ‘AM DMAR SER GYIS KUN TU KHYAB PA’I SNANG BA ‘BYUNG BA’O,,

This is a reference to the fact that—in the period following the attainment of this level—a light with a crimson color, or a russet gold, covers every direction.


[726]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,SA GSUM PA NI ‘OD BYAD {%BYED} PA’O,
,YE SHES ZHI BA’I ‘OD ‘BYUNG PHYIR,
,BSAM GTAN MNGON SHES SKYES PA DANG,
,’DOD CHAGS ZHE SDANG YONGS ZAD PHYIR,
,DE YI RNAM PAR SMIN PAS NA,
,BZOD DANG BRTZON ‘GRUS LHAG PAR SPYOD,
,LHA YI DBANG CHEN MKHAS PA STE,
,’DOD PA’I ‘DOD CHAGS ZLOG PA YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The String of Precious Jewels says as well,

The third of the bodhisattva levels
Is “Shining”; so called because
The light of wisdom which puts
An end to things shines forth—

For the the clairvoyance
Of deep meditation has been born;
Ignorant liking and disliking
Finished completely.

These sages, kings of the gods,
Have reached a higher level
Of patience and effort;

The desire of the desire
Has been stopped.



High qualities of the third

[727]
GNYIS PA LA BZHI, SA ‘DIR BZOD PA LHAG PAR BSTAN PA, BZOD PA GZHAN JI LTAR BSTEN PA’I TSUL, BZOD PA’I PHAR PHYIN GYI DBYE BA, SA ‘DIR ‘BYUNG BA’I DAG PA’I YON TAN GZHAN BSTAN PA’O,,

Here second are the qualities we will describe—the high qualities of this level.  This we will cover in four sections: an explanation of how, at this level, our patience is exceeding; how it is that others practice patience; the divisions of the perfection of patience; and a description of other, very pure qualities that come at this level.



Patience to a higher degree

	[728]
	[III.2]
Asthāna kopī yadi tasya kaścit
kṣureṇa māṃsaṃ palaśo’pi dehāt,
Chindyāt sahāsthnāticiraṃ tadāpi
kṣamādhikaṃ chettari jāyate’sya.

,GAL TE GNAS MIN ‘KHRUG PA ‘GA’ YIS DE’I,
,LUS LAS SHA NI RUS BCAS YUN RING DU,
,SRANG RE RE NAS BCAD PAR GYUR KYANG DE’I, 
,BZOD PA GCOD PAR BYED LA LHAG PAR SKYE,

Suppose some
Find their thoughts disturbed,
Not a place to go,

And they cut pound after pound
Of flesh from their body,

Along with the bone,
And for a very long time.

Even then they find
Even more powerful feelings of patience
Towards the one who is cutting
Their flesh.
				

[729]
DANG PO NI, YE SHES KYI SNANG BA DE LTA BU RNYED PA’I BYANG SEMS DE LA, BZOD PA’I PHAR PHYIN LHAG PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR, GAL TE ZHES SOGS SMOS SO,,

Here is the first.  The verse that starts with “Suppose” here is mentioned in order to describe how the perfection of patience for this person—for the bodhisattva who has attained a light of wisdom like the one we’ve described—has gone to a higher degree.


[730]
SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SBYIN PA DANG TSUL KHRIMS LHAG PA NI ‘DI LA YAR LDAN DU YOD PAS, ‘DIR NI PHAR PHYIN LHAG MA BRGYAD KYI NANG NAS BZOD PA LHAG PA’O,,

So now the person that we’ve described so far—one who has reached a higher degree in their practice of giving, and in following an ethical way of life—is going even higher.  So at this level—from among the eight remaining perfections—it is the perfection of patience which they bring to a higher degree.


[731]
LHAG LUGS NI BZOD PA’I PHAR PHYIN GYI NYAMS LEN PHUL DU BYUNG BA TZAM, LHAG MA BDUN LA ‘DIR MI ‘BYUNG BA’O,,

How is it that they reach a higher degree of the practice of patience?  The idea is that the perfection of patience, for them, reaches an extraordinary level—but that this is truly only of this perfection, and not for the remaining seven.


[732]
DE YANG BYANG SEMS SA GSUM PA BA NI GZHAN GYI SEMS BSRUNG BA’I PHYIR DANG, SHES BYA’I BUD SHING ZHES PAR BSHAD PA DE LTA BU’I YE SHES ZHI BA YOD PA’I PHYIR,

Remember that the bodhisattva at the third level is seeking to protect the minds of others; and that they possess a wisdom which can put an end to things, in the way we heard described by the lines about “Every stick of the firewood of all the things you can know.”


[733]
GZHAN DAG GI KUN NAS MNAR SEMS KYI GZHI, ‘DIS BDAG DANG BDAG GI GNYEN LA GNOD PA SNGAR BYAS SO, ,DE LTA BYED DO, ,MA ‘ONGS PA NA BYED PAR ‘GYUR RO ZHES PA’I DOGS [f. 60a] PA CAN DU ‘GYUR BA, DE LTA BU’I SGO GSUM GYI ‘JUG PA MNGON DU BYED PA MIN PA’I PHYIR, KHONG KHRO BA’I GNAS MIN PA ZHES KHYAD PAR DU BYAS SO,,

Thus the kinds of thoughts which are the very foundation for other people when they start to feel hatred are not something that the bodhisattva would allow themselves to manifest in their actions or words or thoughts—entertaining the idea that “In the past, this person has hurt me or my loved ones” or “They are doing this even now” or “In the future, they may hurt us.”  As such, the words “not a place to go” here are referring specifically to forms of anger such as these.


[734]
DE LTAR YIN KYANG GAL TE DE ‘DRA BA LA KHONG ‘KHRUGS PA ‘GA’ YIS BYANG SEMS DE’I LUS LAS SHA NI RKYANG PA MIN PAR RUS PA DANG BCAS PA DANG,

Despite this, it remains the case that there are some who might find their minds disturbed by thoughts such as these; suppose then that they might even decide to cut the body of the bodhisattva—and not just their flesh, but even the bone along with the flesh.


[735]
SHIN TU CHE BA MI GCOD PAR SRANG RE RE NAS, RGYUN GCIG LA MI GCOD PAR SDOD CING SDOD CING DUS THUNG BA LA GCOD PA ZIN PAR MI BYED PAR, YUN RING MO ZHIG TU GCOD PAR GYUR KYANG,

Or suppose that they do even much worse—and cut not just a single pound of flesh, but pause for some time and then begin cutting again, pound after pound.  And suppose too that they cut not just briefly, but each time cut slowly, for a very long length of time.


[736]
GCOD PA PO DE LA SEMS ‘KHRUG PA MI ‘BYUNG BA TZAM DU MA ZAD KYI, SDIG PA DE’I RKYEN GYIS DMYAL BA LA SOGS PA’I SDUG BSNGAL, RIGS MTHUN GZHAN LAS LHAG PAR MYONG BAR DMIGS PA’I BYANG SEMS LA, GCOD BYED DE LA DMIGS NAS CHES LHAG PAR BZOD PA SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA’O,,

Our bodhisattva though has not the slightest feeling of being upset towards even such a person; not only that, but they are focusing on how the person who hurts them, due to this evil deed, will have to experience a result which matches it, but to a far greater degree: as the intense pain of the hell realms, or something of the like.  As such, they are able to find even more powerful feelings of patience towards the one who is cutting their own flesh.


[737]
‘DI NI BZOD PA LHAG PA’I LHAG TSUL YIN PAS, RAB DGA’ SOGS SA GNYIS SU LUS BCAD PA LA RGYUD MI ‘KHRUG PA YOD KYANG, BZOD PA LHAG PAR SKYE BA MED PAR GSAL BAS, BZOD PA LHAG PA NI SA ‘DI NAS BZUNG STE ‘BYUNG BAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

This then is how exceeding patience reaches its higher degree.  And so—even though it is true as well that no one at the first two bodhisattva levels of Perfect Happiness and such would have feelings in their heart of being upset over having their flesh cut—it is clear that they are unable to bring up this higher degree of patience.  As such, you should understand that it is from this level that we see a truly exceeding level of patience.


	[738]
	[III.3]
	Sambodhisattvasya nirātma dṛṣṭeś
chidyeta ki kena kadā kathaṃ vā,
Dharmāś ca tena pratibimba kalpā
dṛṣṭā yatas tena titikṣate’sau.

,BDAG MED MTHONG BA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LA,
,GANG ZHIG GANG GIS GANG TSE JI LTAR GCOD,
,GANG PHYIR CHOS KYANG DE YIS GZUGS BRNYAN LTAR,
,MTHONG BA DES KYANG DE YIS BZOD PAR ‘GYUR,

The bodhisattva, who has seen
That nothing is itself,
Also sees that these things—

What is being cut,
Who is doing the cutting,
And how they are cutting
At that moment—

Are all like a reflection in a mirror,
And for this as well
Maintain their patience.


[739]
DMYAL BA LA SOGS PA’I SDUG BSNGAL LHAG PA LA DMIGS NAS, BZOD PA LHAG PAR ‘GYUR BA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, GANG GI PHYIR BDAG MED MTHONG BA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ YI LUS LA, GANG GIS GCOD PA DANG, GANG ZHIG GCAD PAR BYA BA DANG, DUS GANG GI TSE TSUL JI LTAR GCOD PA’I ‘KHOR GSUM GYI CHOS RNAMS, SA GSUM PA BA DE YIS GZUGS [f. 60b] BRNYAN LTA BUR MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA DANG, BDAG DANG BDAG GI BA’I KUN BRTAGS KYI ‘DU SHES DANG BRAL BA DES KYANG, BYANG SEMS DE YIS BZOD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

It’s not only that the bodhisattva can picture the extreme pain of places like the realms of hell [which await the perpetrator of the deed of cutting their body] and thus feel an exceeding measure of forbearance.  This is because the bodhisattva, the one who has reached the third level and has seen that nothing is itself, also focuses upon their own body and the things of the three spheres—who it is that is cutting their flesh; the flesh which is being cut by this other person; and how they are cutting the flesh at that moment—and sees them all directly as something which is like a reflection in a mirror: they are free of any impression (any belief of an intellectual nature) which holds to any “me” or “mine.”  And so for this as well they maintain their patience.


[740]
‘GREL PAR KYANG GI SGRA NI BZOD PA’I RGYU BSDU BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR RO,,
ZHES MI ‘KHRUG PA’I RGYU SNGA MAR MA ZAD, BSHAD MA THAG PA ‘DIS KYANG BZOD CES PA YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, ‘DI’I PHYIR YANG ZHES GSUNGS PAS, MTHONG BA DES KYANG ZHES BSGYUR RGYU YIN NO,,

The autocommentary includes a line at this point that says “The words as well here are meant to include additional causes that allow them to be patient”—meaning that, the bodhisattva at this level maintains their patience not only for the previously mentioned reason, but for this reason just mentioned as well.  The autocommentary here also contains the phrase “for this reason too,” which should be interpreted as “and because they see them all.”



How others practice patience

[741]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, KHONG KHRO BYA BAR MI RIGS PA DANG, BZOD PA BSTEN PAR RIGS PA’O,,

Here is the second section mentioned—how it is that others practice patience.  Here we proceed in two steps: an explanation of how wrong it is to allow ourselves to be angry; and an explanation of how right it is to practice patience.



Why anger is wrong

[742]
DANG PO LA BZHI, DGOS PA MED CING NYES DMIGS CHE BAS KHONG KHRO BAR MI RIGS PA, PHYIS KYI SDUG BSNGAL MI ‘DOD BA DANG GNOD LAN BYED PA GNYIS ‘GAL BAR BSTAN PA, SNGAR YUN RING BSAGS PA’I DGE BA ‘JOMS PAS KHONG KHRO BAR MI RIGS PA, MI BZOD PA’I SKYON MANG PO BSAMS NAS KHONG KHRO DGAG PA’O,,

The first of these has four parts of its own: showing how anger is wrong because it pointless, and causes great problems; an explanation of how the desire to avoid future suffering and the desire to hurt someone back contradict one another; how anger is wrong because it destroys the good deeds that we have accumulated for many years in the past; and how we can stop anger by considering the main problems that it causes.



The uselessness of anger

	[743]
[III.4]
Kṛte’pakāre yadi tasya khedo
nivartate kiṃ kṛtam asya khedāt,
Vyarthas tataḥ kheda ihāsya nūnaṃ
lokaḥ paraś cāpi bhaved viruddhaḥ.

,GNOD PA BYAS PAS GAL TE DER BKON NA,
,DE LA BKON PAS BYAS ZIN LDOG GAM CI,
,DE PHYIR DER BKON NGES PAR ‘DIR DON MED,
,’JIG RTEN PHA ROL DANG NI ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR,

Do you think that—
If a person hurts you,
And you feel enmity towards them—

Then this enmity will somehow
Prevent what’s done & gone?

We can conclude then
That feeling enmity now
Over what they did
Is without question pointless.

It also contradicts the world beyond.
					

[744]
DANG PO NI, BZOD PA ‘DI BYANG SEMS SAR GNAS PA RNAMS KYI THUGS DANG ‘TSAMS PA’I CHOS YIN PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, SAR GNAS LAS GZHAN PA RNAMS KYI YON TAN MTHA’ DAG MI ‘DZAD PAR SRUNG BA’I RGYU YANG YIN PAS, MI BZOD PA DANG LDAN PA RNAMS KHRO BA LAS LDOG RIGS PAR ‘CHAD PA NI, GNOD PA ZHES PA NAS MYUR BSTAN {%BSTEN} BYA ZHES PA’I BAR RO,,

Here is the first.  Patience is not only a practice which fits the hearts of bodhisattvas at the third level; it is as well something that those other than people at the bodhisattva levels should maintain, in order to assure that they do not lose all of the good qualities they have developed.  And so the lines of the root text from “Do you think that…” up to “…commended by those who are realized beings” are presented, in order to explain why it is right that those who lack patience should try to stop any anger they might start to feel.


[745]
GAL TE GNOD PA BYAS PA LAS, DER TE GNOD BYED LA BKON PA STE KHRO NA, DE’I TSE GNOD PA BYAS ZIN PA LDOG TU MED PA’I PHYIR, DE LA BKON PA STE DE LA DMIGS PA’I ZHE ‘KHAM PA BYAS PAS, GNOD PA BYAS ZIN PA LDOG GAM CI [f. 61a] STE MI LDOG GO ,DE’I PHYIR DE LA BKON PA ‘DIR NGES PAR DON MED DO,,

Suppose then that a person hurts you, and you feel enmity towards them—meaning that you get angry.  There’s no way that this is then somehow going to prevent the hurt that they have inflicted upon you, and which is already done & gone.  And so the question arises: If you feel enmity towards them—if you take umbrage at what they have done—then do you think that this will somehow prevent that injury, which is already done & gone?  The answer, of course, is that it will not.  We can conclude then that feeling this enmity now over what they did is without question pointless.


[746]
ZHE ‘KHAM PA NI ZHE LA RTZUB PA’I SEMS KAR KAR BA STE KHRO BA DANG DON GCIG GO

The expression “to take umbrage” [zhe ‘kham-pa] here refers to an overwhelming [kar-kar-ba] sensation of irritation within the mind [zhe]; and so it is a synonym for “to become angry.”


[747]
,DE LTAR DGOS PA MED PAR MA ZAD ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL GYI DON DANG YANG NI ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR TE, KHONG KHRO LA SKABS BYIN PAS SHI BA’I ‘OG TU RNAM SMIN YID DU MI ‘ONG BA ‘PHEN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Not only is the anger thus pointless, but it also contradicts your goals for the world beyond; that is, if you allow yourself feelings of anger, then it will project ahead of you—after your death—an upleasant karmic ripening.



Wishes for revenge & to avoid pain
are contradictory

	[748]
[III.5]
Purākṛtasyākuśalasya karmaṇaḥ
phalaṃ yadeva kṣayakṛd vivakṣitam,
Parāpakāreṇa ruṣā ca bījatāṃ
tad eva duḥkhāya kathaṃ hi nīyate.

,SNGON BYAS PA YI MI DGE’I LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU GANG,
,ZAD PAR BYED PAR BRJOD PAR ‘DOD PA DE NYID KO
,GZHAN LA GNOD PA DANG NI KHRO BAS SDUG BSNGAL PHYIR,
,SA BON NYID DU JI LTA BUR NA ‘KHRID PAR BYED,

You claim you’d like to finish off
The consequences of a negative deed
You’ve done in the past—well there it is.

Hurting the other person back,
And anger towards them,

Are precisely the karmic seed
That will bring the pain back—
How then could they be right?


[749]
GNYIS PA NI,

Here next is the second part from above: an explanation of how the desire to avoid future suffering and the desire to hurt someone back contradict one another.  That is, what the next lines of the root text are saying is the following.


[750]
GANG ZHIG RANG GIS SNGON NYES SPYOD BYAS PA’I ‘BRAS BU SDUG BSNGAL LA LONGS SPYOD BZHIN DU, DE LA GTI MUG PAS GZHAN GYIS BDAG LA GNOD PA BYAS SO SNYAM DU RTOG PA DE LA NI, GNOD BYED LA KHRO BA SKYE LA, GNOD LAN BYAS PAS PHYIS DE’I GNOD PA’I SDUG BSNGAL MI ‘BYUNG BAR ‘DOD PA DE YANG BZLOG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA NI,

Consider now a person who is experiencing pain which is a result of a negative deed that they’ve done to someone in the past.  Out of ignorance, they might get the wrong idea that “This other person has hurt me”; and then towards them—towards the person who has hurt them—they might feel anger.  And then they may try to hurt the person back, hoping that this will somehow prevent the pain of the same kind of injury, in the future.  The lines are seeking to prevent this kind of thinking.


[751]
RANG GI LUS LA GNOD PA’I SDUG BSNGAL CHEN PO DGRA DAG GIS BSGRUBS PA DE NI, SNGON BYAS PA YI SROG GCOD KYI MI DGE BA’I LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU, NGAN SONG GSUM DU RNAM SMIN DRAG PO MYONG ZHING, RGYU MTHUN GYI ‘BRAS BU LHAG MAR LUS PA CAN RNAMS KYI, RGYU MTHUN GYI ‘BRAS BU YID DU MI ‘ONG BA MA LUS PA LDOG PA’I RGYU GANG YIN PA, 

And so now think about the great pain that people who hate you might be inflicting upon your body.  This is the consequence of a negative deed that you’ve done in the past: the taking of life, and something which you would normally have to experience as a violent karmic ripening in one of the lower realms.  It also serves to expiate all the rest of the remaining homogenous results—all the rest of the unpleasant homogenous results.


[752]
LAS KYI LHAG MA ZAD PAR BYED PAR BRJOD PAR ‘DOD PA DE NYID KO STE NI,

And so if you claim that you’d like to finish off all your remaining karma, well then “there it is”—that’s it.


[753]
GZHAN LA GNOD PA’I LAN BYED PA DANG, RGYUD KHONG NAS ‘KHRUG PA’I KHRO BAS SDUG BSNGAL ‘DIR MYONG BA LAS CHES LHAG PA’I SDUG BSNGAL, PHYIR TE SLAR YANG SDUG BSNGAL DE’I SA BON TE RGYU NYID DU, JI LTA BUR NA ‘KHRID PAR BYED PA RIGS TE ME {%MI} RIGS SO,,

The wish though to hurt the other person back, and anger that disturbs your mind to its very depths, are precisely the karmic seed—the cause—that will bring the pain “back” to you; meaning, bring you the same pain once again.  How then could these responses be the right thing to do?  In fact, they aren’t!


[754]
DES NA SMAN PAS [f. 61b] NAD GSO BA’I THABS SU GYUR PA GTZAGS BU RNON POS GTAR BA’I SDUG BSNGAL LA BZOD PAR BYA BA LTAR, PHUGS KYI SDUG BSNGAL MTHA’ YAS PA LDOG PA’I DON DU, ‘PHRAL GYI SDUG BSNGAL CHUNG NGU LA CHES SHIN TU BZOD PAR RIGS SO,,

And so it is similar to the way in which we endure the pain of treatment by a physician who—as a means of treating our illness—slices our body with a lance in order to let our blood.  It is fitting then that we endure—to an infinite degree—a minor, temporary suffering, in order to put an end to limitless suffering in the long term.



Destroying our store of good karma

	[755]
	[III.6]
	Śubhaṃ hi dānādatha śīla taś ca
hantyakṣamā kalpa śatair upāttam,
Yasmāt kṣaṇenāpi jinātmajeṣu
nāto’kṣamāyāḥ param asti pāpam.

,GANG PHYIR RGYAL SRAS RNAMS LA KHROS PA YIS,
,SBYIN DANG KHRIMS BYUNG DGE BA BSKAL PA BRGYAR,
,BSAGS PA SKAD CIG GIS ‘JOMS DE YI PHYIR,
,MI BZOD LAS GZHAN SDIG PA YOD MA YIN,

A moment of anger
Towards bodhisattvas

Is enough to destroy
The good karma accumulated

Over the length of a hundred eons
Through giving and an ethical life;

Thus there exists no negative deed
Which is more effective
Than losing ones patience.


[756]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, DKYUS KYI DON DANG, ZHAR BYUNG GI DON BSHAD PA’O,,

Here next is the third part from above: how anger is wrong because it destroys the good deeds that we have accumulated for many years in the past.  Here in turn there are two sections: explanations of the continuation of the previous thought; and of an incidental point.


[757]
DANG PO NI, MI BZOD PA NI RNAM SMIN YID DU MI ‘ONG BA YANGS PA ‘PHEN PA’I RGYU YIN PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, YUN RING DU BSAGS PA’I BSOD NAMS KYI TSOGS ZAD PA’I RGYU YANG YIN NO, ZHES STON PA NI,

Here is the first.  The author next demonstrates how failing to maintain our patience not only acts as a cause which projects extensive, unpleasant karmic results; but at the same time serves as a cause which wears away the accumulation of good karma that has taken us a very long period of time to put together.


[758]
GANG GI PHYIR BYANG SEMS BDAG NYID CHEN PO DES, YUL DE BYANG SEMS YIN PAR MA NGES PAS SAM, YANG NA BYANG SEMS SU NGES KYANG NYON MONGS KYI GOMS PA SHAS CHES PAS, RGYAL SRAS BYANG CHUB TU SEMS BSKYED PA RNAMS LA, BDEN PA DANG MI BDEN PA’I NYES PA LHAG PAR SGRO BTAGS NAS, KHONG KHRO BA’I BSAM PA SKAD CIG TZAM ZHI BSKYED {%ZHIG SKYED} NA YANG,

Suppose now that a great being, a bodhisattva—due to their imputing a fault in another person, whether that fault be actual or not—feels even a moment of anger towards children of the Victors (meaning, towards those who have reached the Wish for enlightenment); whether they have failed to recognize that this person who is the object of their anger is a bodhisattva, or they have recognized them as a bodhisattva, but they are overwhelmed by a habit of thinking negative thoughts.


[759]
DE TZAM GYIS KYANG BSKAL PA BRGYAR BSAGS PA’I BSOD NAMS KYI TSOGS, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SBYIN PA DANG, TSUL KHRIMS KYI PHAR PHYI {%PHYIN} GOMS PA LAS BYUNG BA’I DGE BA RNAMS ‘JOMS PAR ‘GYUR NA BYANG SEMS MA YIN PAS, BYANG SEMS LA KHONG KHRO BA BSKYED NA LTA CI SMOS TE,

Just this amount of anger is enough to destroy the good karma that this bodhisattva has accumulated over the length of a hundred eons: the good deeds they have done through accustoming themselves to the perfections of giving and an ethical life, as we have explained these above.  As such, there is no need to mention the gravity of the act where a person who is not a bodhisattva feels anger towards a bodhisattva.


[760]
DE’I PHYIR RGYA MTSO CHEN PO’I CHU’I TSAD SRANG GI GRANGS KYI NGES MI NUS PA LTAR, BYANG SEMS LA KHROS PA’I RNAM PAR SMIN PA’I MTSAMS NGES PAR MI NUS SO,,

The amount of water contained in the great ocean is something we could never manage to measure in cups set on a scale; and the same is true with trying to ascertain the scope of how the karma ripens for a person who has gotten angry with a bodhisattva.


[761]
DE YI PHYIR DE LTAR NA ‘BRAS BU YID DU MI ‘ONG BA ‘PHEN PA DANG, DGE BA LA GNOD PA BYED PA’I [f. 62a] SDIG PA NI, MI BZOD PA KHONG KHRO LAS GZHAN PA’I MCHOG TU GYUR PA YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

And thus—meaning “therefore”—there exists no negative deed which is more effective than anger, losing ones patience, for projecting unpleasant karmic consequences into the future, and for damaging ones good karma.


[762]
BDEN PA’I NYES PA LHAG PAR SGRO BTAGS PA NI, CHUNG NGU LA CHEN POR SGRO BTAGS PA’O, ZHES ‘GREL BSHAD LAS BSHAD DO,,

The Explanation clarifies that the expression “imputing in them an actual fault, to an excessive degree” refers to imputing a major fault where there is in truth only a minor one.


[763]
DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PAR BSHAD PA DE YANG ‘JAM DPAL RNAM PAR ROL PA’I MDO LAS, ‘JAM DPAL KHONG KHRO BA KHONG KHRO BA ZHES BYA BA NI, BSKAL PA BRGYAR BSAGS PA’I DGE BA NYE BAR ‘JOMS PAR BYED PA DE’I PHYIR, KHONG KHRO BA ZHES BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA’O,,

This explanation of how our store of good karma is destroyed is found in The Sutra of Manjushri’s Play:

O Manjushri, this “anger, anger” that they talk about wipes out the good karma that you have accumulated for a hundred eons; and this is why it is called “anger.”


[764]
MDO DE LAS KHONG KHRO BA’I YUL RTEN GNYIS BYANG SEMS YIN MIN MI GSAL YANG, ‘GREL PAR YUL RTEN GNYIS KA BYANG SEMS KYI DBANG DU BYAS PAR GSUNGS PA NI, RNAM PAR ROL PA’I MDO DE DRANGS PA’I GONG NYID DU, MDO KUN LAS BTUS SU BYAMS PA SENG GE SGRA’I MDO DRANGS PA LAS,

In the sutra, it’s not clear whether in this context the person towards whom the anger is directed, and the person having the anger, are bodhisattvas or not.  In the autocommentary though the section just previous to the citation of The Play refers to a case where both of these are bodhisattvas; and it very clearly derives from a citation of the Sutra of the Lion’s Roar of Maitreya which is found in The Compendium of All the Sutras, and which as we see following does state that both the angered person and the one towards whom they are angry are indeed bodhisattvas:


[765]
BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ GANG LA LA ZHIG GIS, STONG GSUM GYI STONG CHEN PO’I ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS SU GTOGS PA’I SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LA SPYOS PA DANG, BRGYAD PA DANG DBYUG PA DANG, KHU TSUR GYIS BRDEGS PA DE TZAM GIS {%GYIS}, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LA RMA BYUNG ZHING RMAS PAR MI ‘GYUR GYI, 

Suppose any particular bodhisattva should disparage or criticize every single one of the beings living on all the planets of a third-order galaxy—or strike them with a club, or their fist.  If this were all they did, then it would not so much hurt or damage the bodhisattva.


[766]
BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ GANG GIS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ GCIG LA, THA NA GNOD SEMS DANG, THA BA DANG ZHE SDANG GI SEMS BSKYED PA DE TZAM GYIS, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LA RMA PHYUNG ZHING RMAS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If though the bodhisattva were even just to feel malice towards a single other bodhisattva, or any anger or wrath with them, then with nothing more than that they would be hurt, and damaged.


[767]
DE CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, GAL TE DES THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA YONGS SU MA BTANG [f. 62b] NA, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ CIG SHOS LA GNOD SEMS DANG, THA BA DANG SDANG BA’I SEMS JI SNYED DU BSKYED PA DE SNYED KYI BSKAL PAR GO CHA GZOD YANG BGO DGOS SO, , ZHES GSUNGS PAS YUL RTEN GNYIS KA BYANG SEMS LA GSUNGS PA DE LA BRTEN NAS MDZAD PAR MNGON NO,,

And why is that?  Even if this bodhisattva were not to abandon their quest for enlightenment, still they would need to gird themselves once again in their armor, for every single instance of malice, or anger, or wrath towards some other bodhisattva.


[768]
‘O NA SLOB DPON DPA’ BO DANG, ZHI BA LHAS,
,BSKAL PA STONG DU BSAGS PA YI,
,SBYIN DANG BDE GSHEGS MCHOD LA SOGS,
,LEGS SPYAD GANG YIN DE KUN YANG,
,KHONG KHRO GCIG GIS ‘JOMS PAR BYED,
CES BSKAL PA STONG DU BSAGS PA’I DGE BA ‘JOMS PAR BYED PAR GSUNGS PA JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

“Well then,” one may ask, “what about the following verse—found in both Master Shura and Master Shantideva—which says that the act destroys the good karma which we have accumulated over a thousand eons:

All the good deeds we’ve accumulated
Over the length of a thousand eons
By acts such as giving, and making offerings
To Those Who Have Gone to Bliss,

Are destroyed by a single instance
Of the emotion of anger.”


[769]
SPYOD ‘JUG GI ‘GREL PA KHA CIG LAS, BSKAL PA STONG PHRAG DU MAR BSAGS PA’I DGE BA, SEMS CAN LA SDANG BAS ‘JOMS ZHES ZER MOD KYANG YID CHES PAR DKA’O,,

Certain commentaries on the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life make the claim that “You destroy the good karma that you’ve accumulated for many thousands of eons by becoming angry at any living being”; but this is hard to believe.


[770]
SLOB DPON DE GNYIS KYIS YUL RTEN LA GSAL KHA MA MDZAD KYANG, BSKAL PA BRGYA’AM STONG DU BSAGS PA’I DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PA’I KHONG KHRO’I YUL LA NI, BYANG SEMS DGOS SO,,

Neither of the masters just quoted clarifies who the person getting angry, and who the person they are getting angry at, are.  But if the instance of anger involved is one which destroys the good karma that we have accumulated over the length of a hundred or a thousand eons, then the person towards whom we are feeling the anger would have to be a bodhisattva.


[771]
KHRO BA’I RTEN NI BYANG SEMS BDAG NYID CHEN PO ZHES GSUNGS PA LA DPAGS NA, YUL GYI BYANG SEMS LAS BYANG SEMS STOBS CHE BA CIG ‘DRA’O,,

Judging from the statement that the person feeling the anger is a bodhisattva who is a great being, it would seem that they must be a bodhisattva of greater power than the bodhisattva towards whom they feel the anger.


[772]
DE LA KHRO BA’I RTEN NI BYANG SEMS SO SKYER NGES LA, YUL LA NI SA THOB MA THOB GNYIS SU YOD DE, DE LTAR NA BYANG SEMS STOBS CHE BAS CHUNG BA LA DANG, CHUNG BAS CHE BA LA DANG, YUL DANG RTEN STOBS MNYAM PAS MNYAM PA LA KHROS PA GSUM MO,,

On this point, the person feeling the anger is certainly a bodhisattva who is a normal person, whereas the person towards whom they are feeling the anger could be either one who has attained the bodhisattva levels, or one who has not.  As such we can say there are three possibilities here: a bodhisattva of greater power feeling anger towards one of lesser power; one of lesser power feeling anger towards one of greater power; and a case where the person towards whom the anger is directed, and the person feeling the anger, are bodhisattvas of equal power.


[773]
DE’I DANG PO LA NI BSKAL [f. 63a] PA BRGYA YIN LA, BYANG SEMS MA YIN PAS BYANG SEMS LA KHROS NA NI BSKAL PA STONG DU MNGON TE, GNYIS PA DANG GSUM PA DANG, GNYIS PA’I YUL GYI MCHOG DMAN GYI KHYAD PAR LA BRTEN NAS DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PA YANG LUNG LA BRTEN NAS DPYAD PAR BYA’O,,

It’s apparent then that the statement about a hundred eons is made with regard to the first, whereas the thousand eons is where someone who is not yet a bodhisattva becomes angered at someone who already is.  Cases where our store of good karma is destroyed then could refer to the second and third combinations, and even within the second combination could depend upon the relative power of the person towards whom we are angered—these are points which should be resolved based on a careful study of the scriptures.


[774]
STONG GSUM GYI ZHES PA NAS SMRAS PAR MI ‘GYUR BA’I BAR GYIS NI, BYANG SEMS KYIS BYANG SEMS MIN PA LA YID KYIS KHROS NAS, NGAG GIS GSHE BA DANG LUS KYIS BRDEG PA BSTAN PA,

The section of the sutra above which goes [in the English translation] from “Suppose any particular bodhisattva…” up to “…damage the bodhisattva” is talking about a case where a bodhisattva becomes angered, in their mind, towards someone who is not yet a bodhisattva; and then in their speech berates them, and then in their bodily actions strikes them.


[775]
DE YANG BYANG SEMS LA RMA PHYUNG BA DANG, BYANG SEMS RMAS PA DANG MI ‘DRA BAR BSTAN PAS, DE ‘DRA BA LA NI GZHI NAS GO CHA BGO BA MI DGOS PAR SHES SO,,

Making a distinction between a bodhisattva who is thus “hurt,” and one who is thereby “damaged” is meant to inform us that the first alone would not make it necessary for the bodhisattva to make subsequent efforts to don their armor once again.


[776]
BYANG SEMS KYIS BYANG SEMS GCIG LA YANG LUS NGAG TU MA THON PAR YID KYIS SDANG BA TZAM BSKYED NA NI, SEMS DE BSKYED GRANGS JI TZAM PA DE TZAM GYI BSKAL PAR GZHI NAS GO CHA BGO DGOS PAR BSTAN NO,,

We are also being taught that—in a case where a bodhisattva only becomes angered at another, mentally, but does not go on to express themselves either bodily or verbally—then they will have to don their armor subsequently for eons equal in number to the separate instances of this emotion that they have felt.


[777]
DE LTA BU’I YUL NI LUNG BSTAN THOB PA’I SEMS DPA’ DANG, RTEN NI LUNG BSTAN MA THOB PAR MNGON TE, SDUD PA LAS,

It’s apparent that the person towards whom the anger is directed here is a bodhisattva who has attained their confirmation; whereas the person feeling the anger is one who has not—for as The Brief Presentation puts it,


	[778]
,LUNG BSTAN MA THOB BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ GANG ZHIG GIS,
,LUNG BSTAN THOB LA SEMS KHROS RTZOD PA RTZOM BYED NA,
,THA BA SKYON LDAN SEMS KYI SKAD CIG JI SNYED PA,
,DE SNYED BSKAL PAR GZHI NAS GO CHA BGO DGOS SO,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

When a bodhisattva who has yet to receive their confirmation
Feels anger towards one who has, and begins to struggle with them,

Then they must in the years to come gird themselves in their armor,
For eons equal in number to the moments of their wrongful wrath.


[779]
GZHI NAS GO CHA BGO DGOS PA NI, DPER NA BYANG SEMS KYI TSOGS LAM CHEN PO NAS, MYUR POR SBYOR LAM DU ‘PHO THUB PA CIG GIS, LUNG BSTAN THOB PA LA KHROS NA, KHRO SEMS KYI GRANGS DE SNYED KYI [f. 63b] BSKAL PAR SBYOR LAM DU ‘PHO MI NUS PAR, GZHI NAS LAM LA SLOB DGOS PA LTA BU’O,,

What does it mean when we say “they will have to gird themselves in their armor in the years to come”?  Suppose for example that a bodhisattva is at the greater level of the path of accumulation, and that he or she would have been able move up quickly to the path of preparation.  Instead, they become angered at a bodhisattva who has attained their confirmation.  For eons equal to the number of feelings of anger they have had then, they will find themselves unable to advance to the path of preparation, and then only subsequently will they be able to train themselves in this path.


[780]
‘DI LA SPYOD ‘JUG LAS,
,GANG ZHIG DE ‘DRA’I RGYAL SRAS SBYIN BDAG LA,
,GAL TE NGAN SEMS SKYED PAR BYED PA DE,
,NGAN SEMS BSKYED PA’I GRANGS BZHIN BSKAL PAR NI,
,DMYAL BAR GNAS PAR ‘GYUR ZHES THUB PAS GSUNGS,

On this point, the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life says:

Suppose a person begins to feel
Thoughts of malice towards this type
Of bodhisattva, a master of giving;

The Able Ones have stated
That these will dwell in the realms of hell
For eons equal in number
To the thoughts of malice they’ve had.


[781]
ZHES BYANG SEMS LA KHONG KHRO BA’I SEMS BSKYED GRANGS JI SNYED PA DE SNYED KYI BSKAL PAR DMYAL BAR GNAS PAR GSUNGS LA, BSKAL PA MANG POR BSAGS PA’I DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PA’I NYES DMIGS KYANG YOD LA, LUNG BSTAN THOB PA LA MA THOB PAS KHROS NA NI DMYAL BAR GNAS PA BSHAD MA THAG PA DANG ‘DRA LA, DE SNYED KYI BSKAL PAR GZHI NAS GO CHA BGO BA DGOS PA DANG GNYIS YOD DE,

This then states that a person will remain in the hell realms for eons equal in number to the instances of anger they have felt towards a bodhisattva; but there is also the problem that we destroy stores of good karma accumulated over many eons.  This is similar to the situation we’ve just described, with two points to it: a person who has yet to attain their confirmation becoming angered at one who has, and thus having to dwell in the realms of hell; and then having to gird themselves once more in their armor, during the eons to follow, for eons equal in number.


[782]
RNAM PAR ‘THAG PA BSDUS PA LAS GSUNGS PA’I CHOS SPONG BYUNG BAS LO BDUN GYI BAR DU NYIN GCIG CING DUS GSUM DU NYES PA BSHAGS NA RNAM SMIN DAG KYANG, BZOD PA ‘THOB PA LA MYUR NA’ANG BSKAL PA BCU DGOS PAR GSUNGS PA LTAR,

The sutra called Everything There Is, Crushed to a Small Pile of Powder speaks of how—if a person commits the misdeed of giving up the Dharma, but then confesses their fault three times a day, every day, for seven years—they can clean themselves of the karmic result to come; but they will still have to spend ten eons, at the fastest, in order to attain the level called “mastery.”


[783]
SGO DU MA NAS BSHAGS BSDAM BYAS NA, LAM BUL DU SONG BA SOR MA CHUD KYANG, RNAM SMIN MYONG BA ‘DAG PAR ‘GYUR BAS ‘BAD PAR BYA’O,,

Just so, the case is that—if we freely admit our fault and then commit to restraining ourselves in the future—then we can purify ourselves of any future experience of a karmic ripening; although we will not be able to repair the slowness with which we travel the paths.



How anger destroys good deeds

[784]
GNYIS PA NI, YUL RTEN GNYIS KA BYANG SEMS MIN KYANG, KHONG KHRO SKYES NA DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PA YOD DE, THAMS CAD YOD SMRA’I GZHUNG BSLAB BTUS SU DRANGS PA LAS,

Here is the second section from above: an incidental point on how anger destroys good deeds.  Even if the person that they get angry towards, and the person who gets angry, are not bodhisattvas, feelings of anger can still destroy the good karma that has been stored up.  This is demonstrated in a statement “from a text of the Totalists,” quoted in the Compendium of All the Trainings, which begins with:


[785]
DGE SLONG DAG DGE SLONG GIS ‘DI LTAR SKRA DANG SEN MO’I MCHOD RTEN LA YAN LAG THAMS CAD KYIS PHYAG ‘TSAL TE, SEMS DANG [f. 64a] BAR BYED PA LA LTOS,

“Look, o monks; do you see that monk over there who is performing full-body prostrations, with thoughts of clear faith, towards an offering shrine containing the clippings of hair and fingernails from the body of a Holy Being?”


[786]
BTZUN PA DE LTA LAGS SO,,

“O revered one, thus it is.”


[787]
DGE SLONG DAG DGE SLONG ‘DIS JI TZAM ZHIG NON PA’I ‘OG DPAG TSAD BRGYAD KHRI BZHI STONG NA GSER GYI ‘KHOR LO LA THUG PA’I BAR NA, BYE MA JI SNYED YOD PA DE SNYED DU,

“Think, o monks, of the particles of dust that compose the earth which lies between the area which his body covers, on down to the disk of gold that lies at the foundation of the world—84,000 yojana [about 120,000 miles] below.”


[788]
DGE SLONG ‘DIS ‘KHOR LO SGYUR BA’I RGYAL SRID STONG ‘GYUR DU LONGS SPYOD PAR ‘GYUR RO,

“This monk, from this deed, will experience a thousand rebirths as an Emperor of the World.”


[789]
ZHES BYA BA NAS, DE NAS TSE DANG LDAN PA NYE BAR ‘KHOR GYIS, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS GA LA BA DE LOGS SU THAL MO SBYAR BA BTUD DE, BCOM  LDAN ‘DAS LA ‘DI SKAD CES GSOL TO,,

The statement in question ends with:

And then the junior monk Upali turned to where the Conqueror was sitting, and—joining his palms at his breast—bowed, and addressed the Conqueror in the following words:


[790]
BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS DGE SLONG GI DGE BA’I RTZA BA DE LTA BUR CHE BAR GSUNGS NA, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS DGE BA’I RTZA BA DE DAG GANG DU BSRABS PA DANG, YONGS SU BYANG BA DANG, YONGS SU ZAD PAR ‘GYUR,

“O Conqueror, given that you have described this monk’s store of virtue as being that massive, may I ask what it is that could ever cause this store to be reduced; to be swept away; and be entirely ended?”


[791]
NYE BAR ‘KHOR JI LTAR TSANGS PA MTSUNGS PAR SPYOD PA LA RMA PHYUNG BA DANG, RMAS PAR BYAS PA DE LTA BU NI NGAS MA MTHONG STE, NYE BAR ‘KHOR DES DGE BA’I RTZA BA CHEN PO ‘DI DAG BSRABS PA DANG, YONGS SU BYANG BA DANG, YONGS SU ZAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

“O Upali, I see nothing that can hurt, nothing that can damage, someone leading the monk’s way of life in the way that this can.  Upali, this reduces their store of virtue; it sweeps it away; it ends this store, entirely.”


[792]
NYE BAR ‘KHOR DE LTA BAS NA CI NAS ‘GAL BA LA YANG, SEMS KYIS GNOD PAR MI BYA NA, RNAM PAR SHES PA DANG BCAS PA’I LUS LA LTA SMOS KYANG CI DGOS ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR RO,,

“And so what need is there to mention, Upali, what happens if they oppose this person, not through some malice in their thoughts, but towards the body which contains the mind?”


[793]
DE LA BSRABS PA NI DGE RTZA PHUN TSOGS CHES CHE BA SKYED PA CHUNG NGU BTANG BA DANG, RGYUN RING SKYED PA THUNG NGU BTANG BA LTA BU STE, ‘BRAS BU THAMS CAD MA BCOM PA ZAD PA CHUNG NGU’I, 

It would appear that the point of the word “reduce” in this citation is to indicate a lesser degree of loss: it’s as if a very substantial accumulation of good karma is lessened, and that engaged in over a very long period of time is shortened; that is, not all of the fruits to come are destroyed.


[794]
,BYANG BA NI ZAD PA ‘BRING PO’I, ,GTUGS PA NI ZAD PA CHEN POR MNGON NO,,

When the text then says “swept away,” it is indicating a medium degree of damage; and when it speaks of “ended” then, it refers to great damage in its final form.


[795]
ZLA BA SGRON [f. 64b] MA’I MDO MDO BTUS SU DRANGS PA LAS KYANG, 
,PHAN TSUN GNOD PA’I SEMS SU GANG BYED PA,
,DE LA TSUL KHRIMS THOS PAS SKYOB MI BYED,
,BSAM GTAN DANG NI DGON GNAS MI SKYOB STE,
,SBYIN DANG SANGS RGYAS MCHOD PA’ANG SKYOB MI BYED,
CES GSUNGS TE PHAN TSUN NI GROGS TSANGS PA MTSUNGS PAR SPYOD PA’O,,

And when The Sutra of the Lamp of the Moon, as quoted in The Compendium of All the Sutras, mentions the phrase “towards each other,” it is referring to associates who are both following the monk’s way of life:

	Suppose they feel malice towards each other—
	In such a case, the fact that they possess great learning,
	And are even leading an ethical life, cannot protect them;

	Neither can their meditation protect them,
	Nor the fact that they live in a monastery;

	The giving they have done cannot protect them,
	Nor even the offerings that they have made
	Towards the Enlightened Ones themselves.


[796]
TSUL KHRIMS SOGS DRUG GIS MI SKYOB PA NI, KHONG KHROS DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PA ‘GOG MI NUS PA’O,,

When the lines state that leading an ethical life and the other five cannot protect this person, what they mean is that these cannot prevent anger from destroying the stores of good karma which one has accumulated.


[797]
GZHOM BYA’I DGE RTZA NI SNGAR GYI MDO LAS GSAL BAR MA BSHAD LA, SPYOD ‘JUG LAS, ,SBYIN DANG BDE GSHEGS MCHOD PA SOGS DANG, ‘JUG PAR SBYIN PA DANG TSUL KHRIMS LAS BYUNG BA LA BSHAD DE, ‘GREL PAR BSOD NAMS KYI TSOGS ZHES GSUNGS PAS BDAG MED LEGS PAR RTOGS PA’I DGE RTZA LA MI BYED PA ‘DRA STE DPYAD DE,,

What is the nature of the stores of good karma which are destroyed?  The sutras just quoted are not explicit on this point.  The Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life though explains them as good deeds such as “giving and making offerings to Those Gone to Bliss”; whereas Entering the Middle Way describes the stores as coming from the acts of giving and observing an ethical way of life.  The autocommentary specifically mentions “the accumulation of merit,” and so it would seem that we are not talking about stores of karma accumulated by someone who clearly understands that things are not themselves; but this point needs to be examined further.


[798]
‘O NA BLO GROS MI ZAD PAS BSTAN PA’I LUNG MDO BTUS SU DRANGS PA LAS, RGYA MTSO CHEN POR CHU THIGS LHUNG BA NI, BSKAL PA CHEN PO MA BYUNG GI BAR DU MI ZAD PA DPER MDZAD NAS, BYANG CHUB TU BSNGOS PA’I DGE RTZA YANG BYANG CHUB MA THOB KYI BAR DU MI ZAD PAR GSUNGS PA DANG,

One may pose the following question:

But what about the reference to the Sutra of the Teaching by Akshaya Mati, Never-Ending Wisdom, that we find in The Compendium of All the Sutras?  Remember that it gives the metaphor of a drop of water which falls into the great ocean and stays there until the end of a great eon—and states that stores of good karma dedicated to enlightenment are similar, for they are not exhausted until we actually achieve this enlightenment.


[799]
SDONG PO BKOD PA LAS KYANG, DNGUL CHU’I RIGS GSER DU SNANG BA ZHES PA SRANG GCIG GIS, LCAGS SRANG STONG GSER DU BSGYUR YANG, LCAGS DES DE ZAD PAR BYA MI NUS PA DPER MDZAD NAS, BYANG CHUB TU SEMS BSKYED PA’I DNGUL CHU’I KHAMS NI, LAS DANG NYON MONGS PA’I LCAGS THAMS CAD KYIS ZAD PAR MI NUS PAR GSUNGS PAS,

The House of the Jewel Trees as well speaks of a special kind of quicksilver called “the golden transformation.”  A single ounce of this liquid has the power to turn a thousand ounces of iron into gold; but even this quantity of iron can not exhaust the quicksilver.  This metaphor is used to explain how all the iron of our karma and negative emotions is powerless to exhaust the quicksilver core of our Wish for enlightenment.


[800]
SEMS BSKYED DANG DES ZIN PA’I DGE BA DANG, BYANG CHUB [f. 65a] TU BSNGOS PA’I DGE BA RNAMS KHONG KHROS ‘JOMS MI NUS SAM SNYAM NA, DE NI MIN TE BYANG SEMS BDAG NYID CHEN PO’I DGE RTZA RNAMS ‘JOMS PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And so one may well pose the question of whether good karma imbued by this Wish—or good karma which a person has dedicated towards their enlightenment—are things which anger has no power to destroy.  The answer is no; for it is stated that the store of good karma belonging to a bodhisattva who is a great being can be destroyed.


[801]
DES NA LUNG SNGA MA’I DON NI, ‘BRAS BU PHYUNG BAS MI ZAD PA YIN GYI, KHONG KHROS MI ‘DZAD PA MIN LA, GNYIS PA’I DON KYANG SEMS BSKYED LA BRTEN NAS, LAS NYON GTAN ZAD NUS PA LTAR LAS NYON GYIS TSUR MI NUS PA’O,,

Therefore the meaning of the first of the two quotations is that the karmic result in question cannot be exhausted by its coming out; but not that it cannot be finished off by anger.  And the meaning of the latter citation is that—by relying upon the Wish for enlightenment—we can finish off our karma and negative emotions permanently; but this is not the case in the other direction, for our karma and negative emotions have no power to do the same thing to our Wish.


[802]
DGE RTZA BCOM PA’I DON LA KHA CIG NA RE SNGAR GYI DGE BA RNAMS KYI ‘BRAS BU MYUR DU SKYED PA’I NUS PA BCOM NAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYIN PA RGYANG BSRINGS TE, SNGON LA ZHE SDANG LTA BU DE’I ‘BRAS BU ‘BYIN PA YIN GYI, DA GDOD RKYEN DANG PHRAD NA RANG RANG GI ‘BRAS BU MI ‘BYIN PA MIN TE, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I LAM GANG GIS KYANG SPANG BYA’I SA BON SPONG MI NUS NA, NYON MONGS PAS SA BON SPONG BA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO ZHES ZER RO,,

On the question of how our stores of good karma are destroyed, some have made the claim that what is destroyed is the ability of our previous good deeds to produce their results quickly; that is, the production of their results is delayed, as the results of the anger manifest first.  It is not however as though—if these good karmas meet with the necessary conditions—they cannot then immediately give forth their results.  If it is the case, they say, that worldly spiritual paths lack the power to eliminate certain negative seeds that we would like to rid ourselves of, then it is completely impossible that a negative emotion would be able to eliminate a positive seed.


[803]
RGYU MTSAN DE NI MA NGES TE, SO SO SKYE BOS GNYEN PO STOBS BZHIS MI DGE BA SBYANGS PA’I DGE BA YANG SA BON SPANGS PA MIN KYANG, DA GZOD RKYEN DANG PHRAD KYANG RNAM SMIN ‘BYIN PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR DANG,

But this reason is not one which is necessarily true.  When a common person uses the four powers to clean away a negative karma, it is not that the good deed of doing so rids them of the negative seed; rather, what happens is that—even should the necessary supporting circumstances convene—it is impossible for the seed to give forth its karmic result.


[804]
SBYOR LAM RTZE MO DANG BZOD PA THOB PA’I TSE LOG LTA DANG, NGAN ‘GRO’I RGYUR GYUR PA’I MI DGE BA’I SA BON MA SPANGS KYANG, RKYEN DANG PHRAD NA’ANG LOG LTA DANG NGAN ‘GROR SKYE BA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And when a person reaches the levels of the path of preparation named “peak” and “mastery,” it becomes impossible for them to entertain a mistaken view, or to take a rebirth in one of the realms of misery—even though they have not at this point rid themselves of the seeds of negative deeds which act as the cause for mistaken views, or a lower rebirth.


[805]
GZHAN YANG,
,LAS KYIS ‘KHOR BAR LCI GANG DANG,
,NYE BA GANG DANG GOMS PA GANG,
,SNGON BYAS GANG YIN DE DAG LAS,
,SNGA MA SNGA MA RNAMS [f. 65b] SMIN ‘GYUR,
ZHES MDZOD ‘GREL DU MDO DRANGS PA LTAR,

We moreover see the following statement from a sutra, quoted in the autocommentary to the Treasure House of Higher Knowledge:

	Here in the cycle of life,
	Karmas ripen in order
	Of those which are particularly serious;

	Those which are closer;
	Those committed habitually;
	And those committed earlier. 


[806]
DGE MI DGE’I LAS GANG SNGON LA SMIN PA DES, RE ZHIG LA LAS GZHAN DE SMIN PA’I GO BKAG KYANG, DE TZAM GYIS DGE BA’AM MI DGE BA ‘JOMS PAR GZHAG MI NUS SHING MA GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The point here is that—although it is the case that the ripening of any particular good or bad karma earlier than another might for the time being block the ripening of that other karma—you could never then say that nothing more than that had “destroyed” this other particular good or bad karma; and in fact there are no such statements made in scripture.


[807]
GZHAN DU NA MI DGE BA’I LAS STOBS LDAN THAMS CAD DGE RTZA ‘JOMS BYED DU GSUNG DGOS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If this were not the case, then the scriptures would have to state that all powerful negative karmas acted to destroy our store of good karmas.


[808]
DES NA ‘DI LA DBU MA SNYING PO’I ‘GREL PAR, MI DGE BA STOBS BZHIS SBYANGS PA DANG, LOG LTA DANG GNOD SEMS KYIS DGE RTZA BCOM PA GNYIS KA ,SA BON NYAMS PA RKYEN DANG PHRAD KYANG MYU GU MI ‘BYUNG BA LTAR, DA GDOD RKYEN DANG PHRAD KYANG ‘BRAS BU ‘BYIN MI NUS PAR GSUNGS SO,,

Thus it is that the commentary to The Heart of the Middle Way states that in both cases—that is, where we clean ourselves of a negative deed by using the four powers; and also where we destroy our store of good deeds by entertaining mistaken views, or malice towards another—what happens is similar to the case in nature, where even if a seed which is damaged meets with the necessary conditions, it will fail to give a sprout.  That is, the deeds in both the cases lack the power to produce a result—even if they subsequently encounter the conditions normally necessary to do so.


[809]
DGE BA ‘JOMS PA YANG KHONG KHRO SKYES MA THAG RGYUD LA DGE BA MED PAR ‘GRO BA MIN GYI, ‘BRAS BU ‘BYIN PA’I NUS PA LA GNOD PA BYED PA’O,,

When we say “destroy good deeds,” by the way, we don’t mean that—just after you feel the moment of anger—you suddenly don’t have any good deeds at all; rather, you damage the power of the seed to give its result.


[810]
DE YANG ZAD PA CHUNG ‘BRING CHE GSUM BSHAD PA’I GANG GNOD PA BYAS TSOD DE SLAR SMIN MI NUS PA’O,,

In this regard, we speak of a “lesser, a medium, & a greater ending”; meaning that the seed will be unable to ripen to an extent commensurate with the damage done.


[811]
DE LTAR NA GNOD PA SKYEL TSUL LA LAM GSAR PA MYUR POR SKYE BA’I NUS PA BCOM PA DANG, BDE ‘GRO SOGS KYI ‘BRAS BU SKYE BA LA GNOD PA BYAS PA GNYIS SO,,

Thus we can say that the seeds are damaged in two different ways: the capacity of the seeds to produce a new path quickly is destroyed; and their capacity to produce a result such as one of the higher realms is damaged.


[812]
BYANG SEMS LA KHROS PA DANG BRNYAS PA DANG, KUN SLONG NGAN PAS SMAD PA LA NYES PA MU MED PA MDO BTUS LAS GSUNGS SHING,

The fact that getting angry at a bodhisattva, and disparaging them—or saying bad things about them, out of a motivation of malice—causes an infinite number of problems is described in The Compendium of All the Sutras.


[813]
DE LA BYANG SEMS SU NGES MA NGES DANG, KHRO BA’I RGYU MTSAN BDEN MI BDEN GNYIS ‘DRA BAR GSUNGS PAS, KHONG KHRO SPYI DANG KHYAD PAR DU TSANGS PA MTSUNGS PAR SPYOD PA DANG, BYANG SEMS LA DMIGS [f. 66a] PA’I KHONG KHRO ‘GOG PA LA NUS PA CI YOD KYIS ‘BAD PAR BYA’O,,

In this regard, it is stated that the result is similar whether you have recognized that the person is a bodhisattva or not; and whether your reason for being angry is something which is true, or not.  It behooves us then to try, as hard as we can, to stop our feelings of anger in general; and especially anger which is directed towards the ordained, or towards a bodhisattva.


[814]
NAM SNYING GI MDOR RTZA LTUNG RNAMS KYIS SNGON BSKYED PA’I DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PA DANG, BSLAB BTUS LAS, RNYED BKUR LA LHAG PAR ZHEN PAS KHYIM LA LTA BA DANG, MNGON PA’I NGA RGYAL GYIS KHENGS PA DANG CHOS SPONG BAS KYANG SNGON BSKYED PA’I DGE BA ZAD PAR BYED CING, DGE BA’I CHOS KYIS RGYAS PAR MI ‘GYUR BAR GSUNGS PAS,

The Sutra of the Essence of the Sky describes how root downfalls can destroy the store of good deeds that we have built up previously.  The Compendium of the Trainings says that looking to a household while entertaining a strong desire for honor and offerings; arrogance born from overweening pride; and giving up the teachings can all as well finish off good seeds that we have previously planted—and also prevent the growth of our past good deeds.


[815]
DGE RTZA ‘JOMS PA’I RKYEN NGO SHES PAR BYAS NAS, LHAG PAR YANG SPONG DGOS SO, ,’DIR NI MDO TZAM STE MDO BTUS DANG BSLAB BTUS NGES PAR BLTA BAR BYA’O,,

As such, we should acquaint ourselves with all the actions that can trigger the destruction of our store of good deeds, and make special efforts to give up these acts.  I have given only a rough summary of them here; you must be sure to read yourself the relevant sections in The Compendium of All the Sutras, and The Compendium of the Trainings.
 


Stopping anger by considering
the problems it causes

	[816]
	[III.7]
Karoti vairūpyam asādhutāṃ nayen
nayānaya jñāna vicāraṇāṃ haret,			
Prapātayed durgatim āśu cākṣamā,
kuryāt kṣamā tūkta virodhino guṇān.

	[III.7a]
,MI SDUG GZUGS SU BYED CING DAM PA MIN PAR BKRI
,TSUL DANG TSUL MIN SHES PA’I RNAM DPYOD
‘PHROG BYED CING,
,MI BZOD PA YIS MYUR DU NGAN ‘GROR SKYUR BAR BYED,
 
Losing your patience makes your appearance unattractive,
And leads you to do things which are low.

It robs you of your capacity to distinguish
Between what is right to do, and what is not;

And it quickly throws you down
Into the lower realms.
			


[817]
BZHI PA NI, GZHAN YANG MI BZOD PA NUS PA MED PAS NI, RANG NYID KHO NA ‘JOMS LA, NUS PA CAN SNYING RJE MED PAS NI RANG GZHAN GNYIS KA ‘JOMS PA ‘DI NI,

Here is the fourth part of our explanation of how right it is to practice patience—the part about how we can stop anger by considering the main problems that it causes.  We can moreover say that losing your patience, which has no real power, destroys only you yourself; whereas a lack of compassion—which does have real power—destroys both yourself & others.


[818]
SKYES PA NYID KYIS BZHIN MI SDUG PA’I GZUGS SU BYED CING, DAM PA MIN PAR BKRI BAR BYED PA DANG, ‘DI NI BYA BA’I TSUL DANG, ‘DI NI BYA BA’I TSUL MIN PA’O SNYAM PA’I RNAM DPYOD ‘PHROG PAR BYED CING, MI BZOD PA KHONG KHRO YIS, SHI BA’I ‘OG TU MYUR DU NGAN ‘GROR SKYUR BAR BYED PA’I

This losing your patience—this anger—need only to appear in your heart, and immediately it makes your appearance, your face, unattractive; leading you as well to do things which are low.  It also robs you of your capacity of discrimination: an ability to make the distinction where you think to yourself, “This is something which is right to do; and this is something which is not right to do.”  And after you die, it quickly throws you down into the lower realms.


[819]
NYES DMIGS RNAMS BSAMS LA, CI NAS KYANG KHONG KHRO BA LA SKABS MI SBYIN SNYAM PAS KHONG KHRO DGAG PAR BYA’O,,

Try to think about all of these disadvantages of anger, and stop whatever anger is within you: decide to yourself, “No matter what, I will never give anger a chance to grow in my mind.”



The good that comes from patience

	[820]
	[III.8]
Prāsādikaḥ sādhujana priyaś ca
nayānaya jñāna vicakṣaṇaś ca,
Ataḥ paraṃ deva manuṣya janma
titikṣa yā syād aśubha kṣayaś ca.

	[III.7b-8]
,BZOD PAS BSHAD ZIN DANG ‘GAL YON TAN
RNAMS BYED DO,
,BZOD PAS MDZES SHING SKYE BO DAM PA LA,
,PHANGS DANG LUGS DANG LUGS MIN SHES PA LA,
,MKHAS PAR ‘GYUR ZHING DE YI ‘OG TU NI,
,LHA MI’I SKYE DANG SDIG PA ZAD PAR ‘GYUR,

		Patience brings us good qualities—the opposite
		Of what we have described so far.

		It makes us attractive in our appearance,
And we become valued & cherished

To beings who are holy.  We become well versed
In what is proper to do, and what
Is not proper to do; after that happens

We take our birth among
The worldly gods or humans;
And bad deeds done are ended.
				

[821]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, BZOD PA’I YON TAN MANG PO BSAM PA DANG, DON BSDUS TE BZOD PA BSTEN PAR GDAMS PA’O,,

This brings us to the second major step in our description of how others practice patience—an explanation of how right it is to practice patience.  We proceed in two parts: considering the many good qualities of patience; and then a final summary where we are advised to rely upon patience.


[822]
DANG PO NI, GAL TE MI BZOD PA’I SKYON DE DAG YIN NA, DE DANG ‘GAL BA BZOD PA’I YON TAN GANG YIN ZHE NA, BZOD PA BSGOMS [f. 66b] PAS NI SNGAR BSHAD ZIN PA’I KHONG KHRO’I SKYON DANG ‘GAL BA’I YON TAN RNAMS BYED DO,,

Here is the first.  One may ask the following question: “Given that losing our patience causes the problems you’ve just described, what then are the good qualities of the opposite—of keeping our patience?”  The answer is that keeping our patience brings us good qualities which are the opposite of the problems that we have described so far, for anger.


[823]
DE YANG BZOD PA BSGOMS PAS GZUGS MDZES PA THOB CING, SKYE BO DAM PA RNAMS LA PHANGS SHING GCES PA DANG, LUGS TE RIGS PA DANG LUGS MIN PA MI RIGS PA SHES PA LA MKHAS PAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

And so we can say that—when we keep our patience—we come to have an attractive appearance, and we become valued & cherished to beings who are holy.  We become well-versed in understanding “what is proper to do,” meaning what is right; and what is “not proper to do,” meaning what is not right.


[824]
SHI BA DE YI ‘OG TU NI LHA DANG MI’I SKYE BA LEN PA DANG, KHONG KHRO BA SOGS KYIS BSAGS PA’I SDIG PA ZAD PAR ‘GYUR BA RNAMS BSAMS LA BZOD PA’I STOBS BSKYED DO,,

After that happens—meaning, after our death—we take our birth among the worldly gods or humans; and the bad deeds that we have done, accumulated, in the past (from getting angry, for example!) are ended.  Think about these good qualities, and redouble your efforts to cultivate the power of patience.



Advice to be patient

	[825]
	[III.9]
Roṣa kṣamā doṣa guṇān avetya
pṛthagjanenātha jinātmajena,
Hitvākṣamām āśu niṣevaṇīyā
kṣāntiḥ sadaivāryajana praśastā.

,SO SO’I SKYE BO DANG NI RGYAL SRAS KYIS,
,KHRO DANG BZOD PA’I SKYON [f. 203b] YON RIG BYAS TE,
,MI BZOD SPANGS NAS ‘PHAGS PA’I SKYE BO YIS,
,BSNGAGS PA’I BZOD PA RTAG TU MYUR BSTEN BYA,

Common beings and children of the Victors
Should come to understand

The problems of anger
And the good qualities of patience [f. 203b].

Stop ever losing your patience,
And quickly come to rely upon,

In every situation, that patience commended
By those who are realized beings.


[826]
GNYIS PA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR SO SO SKYE BOS KHROS PA’I SKYON NYES DMIGS DANG, RGYAL SRAS RNAMS KYIS BZOD PA’I PHAN YON RIG PAR BYAS TE, MI BZOD PA SPANGS NAS, ‘PHAGS PA’I SKYE BO YIS BSNGAGS PA’I BZOD PA RTAG TU STE DUS THAMS CAD DU BSTEN PAR BYA’O,,

Here then is that second step, on the summary.  Common beings should come to understand the problems that come from getting angry, and children of the Victors should come to understand the good qualities that come from patience—just as we have described these above.  They should give up ever losing their patience; and learn to rely, in every situation (at every moment), upon that state of patience which has been commended by those who are realized beings.



The two kinds of patience

	[827]
	[III.10]
	Trayopalambhe sati laukikīyaṃ
Sambuddha bodhau pariṇāmitāpi,		
Lokottarā pāramiteti Buddhā
uśanti tām eva vinopalambham.

,RDZOGS SANGS RGYAS KYI BYANG CHUB 
PHYIR BSNGOS KYANG,
,GSUM DMIGS YOD NA DE NI ‘JIG RTEN PA’O,
,DMIGS PA MED NA DE NYID SANGS RGYAS KYIS,
,’JIG RTEN ‘DAS PA’I PHA ROL PHYIN ZHES BSTAN,

The one where we still perceive the three
Is the one which is still of the world,
Even if it happens to be dedicated
To the enlightenment of a total Buddha.

But the one where we perceive none of them
Is the only one that the Buddhas
Have described as “That perfection
Which is beyond the world.”


[828]
GSUM PA NI, BZOD PA’I PHAR PHYIN LA ‘JIG RTEN LAS MA ‘DAS PA DANG, ‘DAS PA GNYIS SU ‘BYED PA NI, RDZOGS SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHES PA’I RKANG PA BZHIS STON TE, SNGAR BSHAD PA LAS SHES PAR NUS SO,,

Having completed our explanation of how others practice patience, we have now come to our third major section from above: the divisions of the perfection of patience.  This division, into a perfection of wisdom which has still not gone beyond the world, and another which has gone beyond the world, is what the four lines [of the original Tibetan] including the words “total Buddha” are referring to.  You can understand the meaning of these lines from the explication we have given previously in this text.



Other pure qualities of Shining

	[829]
[III.11]
Dhyānānyabhijñā bhuvi buddhasūno
rāgasya doṣasya parikṣayaś ca,
Asyāṃ bhavatyeṣa ca kāma rāgaṃ
lokasya hantuṃ satataṃ samarthaḥ.

,SA DER RGYAL SRAS BSAM GTAN MNGON SHES DANG,
,’DOD CHAGS ZHE SDANG YONGS SU ZAD PAR ‘GYUR,
,DES KYANG RTAG TU ‘JIG RTEN PA YI NI,
,’DOD PA’I ‘DOD CHAGS ‘JOMS PAR NUS PAR ‘GYUR,

Children of the Victors at this level
Achieve concentration and clairvoyance.

They have finished off	
Ignorant liking & disliking;

And they’re always able as well
To destroy the mistaken wanting

For the objects of desire
That those of the world possess.


[830]
BZHI PA NI, SA GSUM PA DER RGYAL SRAS DE LA BZOD PA’I PHAR PHYIN DAG PA DE BZHIN DU, BSAM GTAN DANG PO LA SOGS PA BZHI DANG, DES MTSON NAS NAM MKHA’ MTHA’ YAS DANG, RNAM SHES MTHA’ YAS DANG, CI YANG MED PA’I SKYE MCHED DANG, SRID RTZE STE GZUGS MED PA’I SNYOMS ‘JUG BZHI DANG,

Our fourth major section is a description of the other, very pure qualities that come at this level.  And so here, at this third bodhisattva level, the perfection of patience belonging to these children of the Victors is pure; but at the same time they achieve the purity of other good qualities.  They perfect the meditation states of the four concentration levels—the first & the rest; and perfect as well the four meditation states that lead to the formless realm—those known as “limitless space”; “limitless awareness”; the “door for the spread of nothing at all”; and the “peak of cyclic existence”—these being implied by the mention in the root text of the “concentration” levels.


[831]
BYAMS PA DANG SNYING RJE DANG DGA’ BA DANG BTANG SNYOMS TE TSAD MED PA BZHI DANG, RDZU ‘PHRUL DANG, LHA’I RNA BA DANG, GZHAN GYI SEMS SHES PA DANG, [f. 67a] SNGON GYI GNAS DRAN PA DANG, LHA’I MIG GI MNGON PAR SHES PA LNGA DAG PA ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

They achieve as well pure forms of the four immeasurables of love, compassion, joy, and equanimity; and of the five kinds of clairvoyance: miracles, the hearing of a god, the ability to read others’ minds, memory of times long past, and the sight of a god.


[832]
BSAM GTAN DANG GZUGS MED PA ‘DI DAG LA ‘JUG LDANG BYED KYANG, BYANG CHUB KYI RGYU YONGS SU RDZOGS PAR ‘GYUR BA MTHONG BA DER CHED DU BSAMS TE, SMON LAM GYI DBANG GIS SKYE YI, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I BSAM GTAN DANG GZUGS MED PA DE DAG GI DBANG GIS MI SKYE’O,,

We should say though that—even as they enter & rise from these meditations related to the various concentration & formless-realm levels—these bodhisattvas do so with the clear purpose of seeing the causes for their enlightenment completed.  They may take birth in the resulting levels by force of their prayers, but it is never due to the power of a worldly form of the meditations of the concentration levels & the formless levels.


[833]
‘DI NI SA DANG PO NAS KYANG ‘THOB MOD KYANG, SA ‘DIR LHAG PA’I TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI BSLAB PA SNGA MA RNAMS LAS CHES MCHOG TU GYUR PA ‘THOB PAS, DE’I DBANG GIS SKYE’AM SNYAM PA’I DOGS PA CHE BAS SMOS SO,,

Now admittedly these abilities have already been achieved from the first of the bodhisattva levels; yet they are referred to by the root text with regard to this level because it is understood that at this point the bodhisattva will have achieved a capacity in the extraordinary training of concentration which is far superior to that at previous levels, and there is thus a greater chance that someone might start to wonder whether or not this capacity could force the normally corresponding rebirth.


[834]
SA ‘DIR ‘DOD CHAGS DANG ZHE SDANG ZAD PAR ‘GYUR BA ‘THOB BO, ,DANG GI SGRA NI KYANG GI DON TE MA SMOS PA GTI MUG ZAD PA YANG BSDU BA’I PHYIR RO,,

At this bodhisattva level, one reaches the point where they finish off ignorant liking & disliking.  The expression “as well” at this point is meant in the sense of inclusion—meaning that it is meant to imply that the end of dark ignorance itself is also included here.


[835]
ZAD PA’I DON NI GTAN ZAD PA MIN TE, MDO NYID LAS, ‘DOD PA DANG GZUGS DANG, SRID PA DANG MA RIG PA’I ‘CHING BA BZHI THAMS CAD BSRABS PAR GSUNGS PAS SO, ,DE DAG GI DON NI BYANG SA’I DGONGS PA LTAR NA, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I BSAM GTAN DANG GZUGS MED KYI TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI MTHUS, ‘DOD PA DANG GZUGS DANG GZUGS MED LA CHAGS PA DANG BRAL BA YIN TE, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I MNGON GYUR SPANGS PA’O,,

And when we say “ended” here, it is not meant to imply that these problems are ended permanently.  As sutra itself says, “The four kinds of chains—desire, form, becoming, and ignorance—are all weakened.”  The meaning of this statement, according to the thinking of The Levels of the Bodhisattva, is that—due to the power of the worldly kinds of meditation related to the concentration levels & the formless levels—one is freed from attachment to the desire realm, the form realm, and the formless realm; and so we rid ourselves of the manifest form of the aforementioned problems.  


[836]
DES NA BSRABS PA ZHES GSUNGS PAR MNGON NO, ,’CHING BA YANG MNGON PA NAS BSHAD PAR MNGON NO,,

This evidently is why the sutra uses the word “weakened.”  And the word “chains” here would seem to follow its usage in the teachings on Higher Knowledge.


[837]
‘DIR MDO LAS, DE’I LTA BAR GYUR PA’I ‘CHING BA RNAMS NI SNGA NAS SPANGS PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON KHA CIG LTA BA THA MA GSUM MTHONG LAM [f. 67b] DU SPANGS PA LA ‘CHAD MOD KYANG, LTA BA KUN BRTAGS LNGA SA DANG POR SPANGS PA LA BYA’O,,

On this point, we see a citation in sutra which says, “We rid ourselves of chains which relate to this kind of viewpoint earlier on.”  Now despite the fact that some have explained this as meaning that one has eliminated the latter three mistaken views during the path of seeing, it should be understood as meaning that we have eliminated the intellectual form of all five mistaken views during the first bodhisattva level.


[838]
BYANG SA LAS NI DE NI THOG MA MOS PAS SPYOD PA’I SA NYID NAS CHOS NYID KYI DE BZHIN NYID LA MOS PA’I PHYIR, LTA BAR GYUR PA’I ‘CHING BA RNAMS SPANGS PA YIN NO, ZHES BSHAD DO,,

Now The Levels of the Bodhisattva says, “At the levels for those who are acting out of aspiration, the chains that consist of viewpoints are abandoned, for they aspire to the true way of the nature of all things.”


[839]
DE’I ‘OG TU MDO LAS, LOG PA’I ‘DOD CHAGS DANG ZHE SDANG DANG GTI MUG ,BSKAL PA KHRAG KHRIG ‘BUM PHRAG DU MAR ‘GRIB PAR BYA BA MA YIN PA, SA ‘DIR SPONG BAR GSUNGS PA NI SA BON SPONG BA LA DGONGS LA, DE YANG SGOM SPANG GI NYON MONGS LHAN SKYES CHE ‘BRING DRUG SA GNYIS PA NAS, BDUN PA’I BAR GYIS SPONG BA’I SA ‘DI’I SPANG BYA LA DGONGS SO,,

Immediately following in the text, the author relates how a sutra describes mistaken desire, repulsion, and misunderstanding which are not such that they have obstructed us for many billions upon billions of years as being eliminated at this level.  What he’s referring to in this wording is the elimination of the seeds: he’s thinking of negativities at this level which are the six greater and medium forms of the innate negativites eliminated by the path of habituation—which we rid ourselves of from the second to the seventh bodhisattva levels.


[840]
‘GREL PA MDZAD PAS NYON MONGS KUN BRTAGS SA DANG PO NAS DANG, LHAN SKYES SA GNYIS PA NAS SPONG BA GSAL BAR MA GSUNGS KYANG, SA BRGYAD PA MA THOB KYI BAR DU NYON MONGS THAMS CAD KYI SA BON ZAD PA MED PA DANG, BDEN ‘DZIN NYON MONGS SU ‘JOG PA DANG, BDEN ‘DZIN MA ZAD BAR DU ‘JIG LTA MI ‘DZAD PA DANG, SA DANG POR KUN SBYOR GSUM SPANGS PA RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG BSHAD PAS, SPYIR NYON MONGS LA GNYIS SU ‘BYED PA DANG, KHYAD PAR DU ‘JIG LTA LA GNYIS SU DBYE DGOS PAR SHIN TU GSAL LO,,

Now the author of the autocommentary does not clearly state that intellectual forms of the negativities are eliminated from the first level, or that inborn forms are eliminated from the second.  Nonetheless, the String of Jewels does explain that the seeds of the negative emotions are not all finished off until eighth bodhisattva level; and that the tendency to hold to things as being real should be classified as a negative emotion; that one cannot finish off the view of destruction until they finish off the tendency to hold things as real; and that the three bonds are eliminated at the first bodhisattva level.  It is thus eminently clear that we must, in general, divide negative emotions into two different types; and that we must, more particularly, divide the view of destruction into two.


[841]
BDEN ‘DZIN NYON MONGS SU ‘JOG PA’I LUGS ‘DI LA, NYON MONGS ZAG MED KYI LAM GYIS SPONG BA NA, BDEN ‘DZIN RE’I SA BON SPONG DGOS PAS SA BON DE LAS GZHAN PA’I GNYIS SNANG ‘KHRUL PA’I BAG CHAGS SHES SGRIB TU BZHAG PA’I [f. 68a] PHYOGS RE YANG GTAN ZAD MI NUS PAS, NYON MONGS THAMS CAD MA ZAD BAR DU SHES SGRIB MI SPONG BA’I PHYIR, SHES SGRIB NI DAG PA SA GSUM GYI SKABS SU SPONG NGO,,

Here in this system, where holding that things are real is classified as a negative emotion, each seed of holding things this way must be eliminated where negativities are eliminated by the path of the immaculate.  But not all the different propensities for seeing things in a mistaken way—with a discrepancy—which are other than these seeds, and which we classify as obstacles to omniscience, can at that point be eliminated permanently.  As such, we cannot rid ourselves of the obstacles to omniscience until we finish off all the negative emotions; and therefore it is during the three pure levels that we rid ourselves of these omniscience obstacles.


[842]
SA GSUM PA DE LA GNAS PA NI, PHAL CHER LHA’I DBANG PO BRGYA BYIN DU ‘GYUR TE, RTAG TU ‘JIG RTEN PA SEMS CAN RNAMS KYI NI, ‘DOD PA LA CHAGS PA’I ‘DOD CHAGS ‘JOMS PAR NUS PA LA MKHAS PAR ‘GYUR ZHING, GTZO BOR GYUR PAS SEMS CAN RNAMS ‘DOD PA’I ‘DAM NAS ‘DON PA LA MKHAS PA YIN NO,,

People at this third level become, for the most part, the lord of the mighty pleasure beings: Shakra.  They always become masters of the ability to destroy that mistaken wanting which craves the objects of desire, and which has always been a part of living beings in the realm of suffering—of those who belong to the world.  And because they come to take a leading role, they become masters as well at extricating these beings from the mire of craving.


[843]
KYANG GI SGRA NI NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, ‘DOD PA’I ‘DOD CHAGS KYANG RTAG TU SPONG ZHES ‘BYUNG BA LTAR BDE’O,,

It seems easier if we read the “as well” of the root text here as Naktso’s translation does it:

They’re always able to eliminate
Mistaken wanting for the objects
Of desire, as well.



To win a Buddha’s body

	[844]
[III.12]
Dānādayo’mī gṛhiṇāṃ trayo’pi
prāyaḥ praśastāḥ Sugatena dharmāḥ,
Sambhāra eṣo’pi ca puṇya nāmā
Sambuddha rūpātmaka kāya hetuḥ.

,SBYIN SOGS CHOS GSUM DE DAG PHAL MO CHER,
,BDE BAR GSHEGS PAS KHYIM PA RNAMS LA BSNGAGS,
,BSOD NAMS ZHES BYA’I TSOGS KYANG DE DAG NYID,
,SANGS RGYAS GZUGS KYI BDAG NYID SKU YI RGYU,

The three practices of giving & the rest
Are recommended by Those Who’ve Gone to Bliss
Primarily for those who live the home life.

What we call the “accumulation of merit”
Is these same three; this is the cause for the holy body
Of a Buddha which is physical in nature.


[845]
GSUM PA NI, DA NI PHAR PHYIN DANG PO GSUM GYI RTEN GYI KHYAD PAR DANG, TSOGS KYI RANG BZHIN DANG, ‘BRAS BU GANG ‘GRUB PA’I RNAM GZHAG GSAL BAR STON PA NI, 

We have now reached the third major part of our explanation of this third bodhisattva level, which concerns the features of the person who practices the first three perfections.  Here we have a clear description of the nature of the accumulation of goodness which is involved; and the result that one attains.


[846]
BYANG SEMS KHYIM PA DANG RAB BYUNG GNYIS SBYIN SOGS KYI RTEN YIN MED {%MOD} KYANG, SGRUB DKA’ SLA LA LTOS NAS NI, BYANG SEMS KHYIM PA RNAMS LA NI SBYIN PA LA SOGS PA’I CHOS GSUM PO DE DAG SGRUB PAR SLA BAS, BDE BAR GSHEGS PAS DE GSUM RTEN DE LA BSNGAGS SO,,

Now bodhisattvas who are either householders or those who have left the home life can be people who practice the perfections of giving & the rest, but there is a distinction of how easy or difficult it will be for them to do so.  Bodhisattvas who live the home life will find the three practices of giving & the rest easier to carry out; and so Those Gone to Bliss have recommended these three for people of this type.


[847]
TSOGS GNYIS KYI NANG NAS BSOD NAMS ZHES BYA BA’I TSOGS KYANG GSUM PA DE DAG NYID DO, ,TSOGS DE NI SANGS RGYAS KYI GZUGS KYI BDAG NYID KYI SKU YI RGYU STE GTZO BO’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’O,,

From among the two forms that the accumulation of goodness involves, it is these same three which constitute the form we call “the accumulation of merit.”  And that’s because this particular kind of accumulation is the cause—meaning the principal cause—for the holy body of a Buddha which is physical in nature.


[848]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,DER NI SBYIN DANG TSUL KHRIMS DANG,
,BZOD PA’I CHOS NI KHYAD PAR DU,
,KHYIM [f. 68b] PA LA BSHAD SNYING RJE YI,
,SNYING PO CAN DE BRTAN GOMS MDZOD,
,CES SO,,

As the String of Jewels puts it as well,

Here the practices
Of giving, an ethical way of life,
And keeping ones patience

Have been taught especially
For those who live the home life.

Those who have compassion
At the core of their heart
Should follow these three steadily.


[849]
BYANG SEMS KHYIM PA LA CHOS GSUM BSGRUB SLA BA’I SBYIN PA NI, ZANG ZING DANG MI ‘JIGS PA DANG, TSUL KHRIMS NI KHYIM PA’I PHYOGS KYI DANG, BZOD PA NI CHOS LA NGES SEMS GTZO CHE’O,,

The primary forms of giving that are referred to when we say that these three practices are easier for a bodhisattva who is a householder are the giving of material objects, and to give someone freedom from fear.  The form of an ethical life referred to is mainly that which is designed for laypeople; and the form of patience is the principally the one where we have a high degree of discernment about the nature of things.


[850]
BYANG SEMS RAB BYUNG RNAMS LA NI BRTZON ‘GRUS DANG BSAM GTAN DANG SHES RAB BSGRUB SLA STE, DE GNYIS LA LHAG MA GZHAN MED PA NI MIN NO,,

For bodhisattvas who are people who’ve left the home life, the perfections of joyful effort; meditation; and wisdom are easier to practice.  Apart from these two, there are no others.


[851]
YE SHES KYI TSOGS NI BSAM GTAN DANG SHES RAB YIN LA, DE GNYIS GTZO BOR CHOS SKU’I RGYU DANG, BRTZON ‘GRUS NI TSOGS GNYIS KA’I RGYU’O,,

The accumulation of wisdom consists of meditation and wisdom; these two are, primarily, the cause for a Buddha’s body of reality.  Joyful effort acts as a cause for both of the accumulations.



The cutting light of the sun

	[852]
[III.13]
Abhilaṣati jagattamo nighātaṃ
svagata tamāṃsi purā vidhūya samyak,
Jinata naya ravau prabhākarīyam
iha bhuvi tīkṣṇataro’pi naiti kopam.

,RGYAL BA’I SRAS PO NYI MA LA GNAS ‘OD BYED ‘DI,
,RANG GTOGS MUN RNAMS DANG PO
YANG DAG BSAL BYAS NAS,
,’GRO BA’I MUN PA RNAM PAR ‘JOMS PAR MNGON PAR ‘DOD,
,SA ‘DIR SHIN TU RNO BAR GYUR KYANG KHRO MI ‘GYUR,

These children of the Victors,
Standing in the Sun of Shining,

Banish the darkness within their being
Even at the first; then gain a fervent desire
To destroy the darkness of beings;

And despite their cutting light,
They never lose their temper.


[853]
BZHI PA NI, SA ‘OD BYED PA ZHES BYA BA RGYAL BA’I SRAS PO NYI MA LA GNAS PA ‘DI NI, RANG GI RGYUD DU GTOGS PA’I MI SHES PA’I MUN PA, DON DAM PA’I SA ‘DI ‘BYUNG BA’I GEGS SU GYUR PA RNAMS, SA DE DANG PO SKYE BZHIN PA’I SKABS SU YANG DAG PAR GSAL BAR BYAS NAS,

With this we have reached the fourth major part of this chapter: a concluding summary of the level, accomplished by describing its high qualities.  And so think now of these children of the Victors, standing in the sun of the bodhisattva level called “Shining.”  The darkness within their being—the darkness of not knowing things, and all the obstacles which prevent this ultimate level from happening for them—are banished by that light, even as the level first starts to grow.


[854]
RNAM PA DE LTA BU GZHAN LA NYE BAR BSTAN PA LAS ‘GRO BA GZHAN RNAMS KYI, SA GSUM PA’I GEGS BYED PA’I MUN PA RNAM PAR ‘JOMS PAR MNGON PAR ‘DOD DO,,

And they then gain a fervent desire to teach other beings of these things, and thus destroy the darkness which blocks them from reaching this same third level.


[855]
BYANG SEMS DE NI SA GSUM PA ‘DIR NYES PA’I MUN PA YON TAN ‘JOMS PAR BYED PA BCOM PAS, NYI MA LTAR SHIN TU RNO BAR GYUR KYANG SKYON LDAN GYI SKYE BO LA KHRO BAR MI ‘GYUR TE, BZOD PA LA CHES LHAG PAR GOMS PA’I PHYIR DANG, SNYING RJES RGYUD SNUM PAR BYAS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here at the third level, the bodhisattva has smashed the darkness of bad qualities which acts to destroy their good qualities, and so their light cuts as bright as the sun—but even so they never lose their temper towards people with many faults, for they have steeped themselves deeply in the art of patience, and their hearts have been softened deep by compassion.


	[856]
	[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA GSUM PA’O,,

This concludes the third wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
 of Entering the Middle Way.


[857]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED [f. 69a] PA GSUM PA’I RNAM PAR BSHAD PA’O,, ,,

This concludes our explanation of the third ultimate “wish for enlightenment,” or chapter, of An Illumination of the True Thought, an expanded explanation of Entering the Middle Way.









Chapter 4
Radiance



Chapter 4
Radiance


[858]
BZHI PA SA BZHI PA ‘OD ‘PHRO BA BSHAD PA LA GSUM, SA ‘DIR BRTZON ‘GRUS LHAG PAR BSTAN PA, SA’I NGES PA’I TSIG BSTAN PA, SPANGS PA’I KHYAD PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

Our explanation of Radiance, the fourth of the bodhisattva levels, has three parts: a description of how, at this point, our practice of joyful effort becomes higher; an explanation of the particular name used for this level; and a description of what it is we rid ourselves of at this point.



The blaze of joy

	[859]
[IV.1]
Vīryānvayā eva guṇā aśeṣāḥ
sambhāra yoḥ puṇya dhiyoś ca hetuḥ,
Vīryaṃ hi yasyām upayāti dīptim
arciṣmatī bhūmir asau caturthī.

,YON TAN MA LUS BRTZON ‘GRUS RJES ‘GRO ZHING,
,BSOD NAMS BLO GROS TSOGS NI GNYIS KYI RGYU,
,BRTZON ‘GRUS GANG DU ‘BAR BAR GYUR PA YI,
,SA DE BZHI PA ‘OD NI ‘PHRO BA’O,

All high qualities follow after joyful effort;
It is the cause for both the accumulation
Of goodness and of knowledge.

The level at which joyful effort blazes
Is the fourth, to which we give
The name of “Radiance.”


[860]
DANG PO NI, DA NI SA ‘DIR PHAR PHYIN DANG PO GSUM LAS, BRTZON ‘GRUS LHAG CING LHAG MA DRUG LAS DMAN PAR BSTAN PA NI,

Here is the first.  Now next we show how, at this level, joyful effort—from among the first three of the perfections—reaches a higher level; and yet remains lower than the other six.


[861]
DGE BA LA MI SPRO BA LA NI SBYIN SOGS LA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU ‘JUG PA MED PAS, YON TAN GANG YANG ‘BYUNG BA MED LA, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SBYIN SOGS KYI YON TAN BSAGS PA’AM, SOG PA LA SPRO BA DANG LDAN PA LA NI, THOB PA’I YON TAN ‘PHEL BA DANG, MA THOB PA THOB PAR ‘GYUR BAS, YON TAN MA LUS PA NI BRTZON ‘GRUS KYI RJES SU ‘GRO ZHING, BSOD NAMS DANG BLO GROS TE YE SHES KYI TSOGS NI GNYIS KYI RGYU’O,,

If a person feels no great joy in doing good deeds, then they will never undertake the actions of giving & the rest—and then they will never develop a single one of the high qualities.  Consider, on the other hand, a person who does take joy in the accumulation—or the accumulating—of the high qualities of giving & the rest, as we have described them above.  They are people who see their good qualities continue to increase; and who are able to achieve what they haven’t yet achieved.  As such, we can say that all high qualities follow after joyful effort; and that it is the cause for both of the accumulations: that of goodness, and that of knowledge.


[862]
DE ‘DRA BA’I BRTZON ‘GRUS SA GANG DU LHAG PAR ‘BAR BA ‘CHANG BAR GYUR PA DE NI, SA BZHI PA ‘OD ‘PHRO BA ZHES BYA’O,,

This fourth bodhisattva level then is given the name of “Radiance,” because it is the level at which we hold in our hands an immense blaze of such joyful effort.


[863]
SA GSUM PAR LHAG PA’I TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI BSLAB PA SA DANG PO GNYIS LAS, CHES PHUL DU BYUNG BA THOB PAS DE LAS SKYES PA’I SHIN TU SBYANGS PA, LE LO GTAN NAS SEL BAR BYED PA KHYAD PAR CAN SA ‘DIR THOB PA’I PHYIR NA, BRTZON ‘GRUS KYI PHAR PHYIN LHAG PA’O,,

At the third of the levels, we attain a degree of the training of concentration which is far superior to what we had at the first two.  As such we also attain, at this level, a high level of the practiced ease which is born of this concentration—and this we achieve in an extraordinary form which clears away every trace of laziness.  For this reason then we can say that we have taken our practice of the perfection of joyful effort to a higher point.



The qualities of enlightenment
	
	[864]
	[IV.2]
Tāmrāvabhāsād adhiko’vabhāsaḥ
sambodhi pakṣyādhika bhāvanājaḥ,
Ājāyate’syāṃ Sugatātmajasya
svadṛṣṭi samparka parikṣa yaś ca.

	[IV.2a]
,DER NI BDER GSHEGS SRAS LA RDZOGS PA YI,
,BYANG CHUB PHYOGS LHAG BSGOMS PA LAS SKYES PA’I,
,SNANG BA ZANGS KYI ‘OD PAS LHAG ‘BYUNG ZHING,

Here the children of Those Gone to Bliss
Practice the qualities of perfect enlightenment
Even higher; and then a light arises from this—

An exceeding light is born,
A light of a copper color.


[865]
GNYIS PA NI, YANG CI’I PHYIR SA ‘DI LA ‘OD ‘PHRO BA ZHES BRJOD CE NA, SA BZHI PA DER NI BDE BAR GSHEGS PA’I SRAS PO LA, RDZOGS PA YI BYANG CHUB KYI PHYOGS KYI CHOS SO BDUN, SNGAR LAS LHAG PAR [f. 69b] BSGOMS PA LAS SKYES PA’I YE SHES KYI SNANG BA, SA GSUM PAR BSHAD PA’I ZANGS KYI ‘OD DANG ‘DRA BA LAS LHAG PA ‘BYUNG STE, DE’I PHYIR YANG DAG PA’I YE SHES KYI ME’I ‘OD LHAG PA ‘BYUNG BAS, BYANG SEMS KYI SA DE LA ‘OD ‘PHRO BA ZHES BYA STE,

Which brings us to our second point—the reason for the name.  Now you may ask, again, why this level is given the name it is: Radiance.  It is because here, at the fourth level, the children of Those Gone to Bliss practice the 37 qualities of perfect enlightenment to a degree which is even higher than ever before.  And then a light arises from this practice—an exceeding light of wisdom is born, similar to the copper-colored light we spoke of for the third level.  And so because at this bodhisattva level there shines this higher light of pure wisdom, we give it the name of “Radiance.”


[866]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,BZHI PA ‘OD ‘PHRO CAN ZHES BYA,
,YANG DAG YE SHES ‘OD ‘BYUNG PHYIR,
,BYANG CHUB PHYOGS MTHUN MA LUS PA,
,KHYAD PAR DU NI BSGOMS PA’I PHYIR,

The root text of Entering the Middle Way thus follows here the String of Precious Jewels, which puts it this way:

The fourth of them is known as Radiance,
Because the light of wisdom pure
Shines forth; and because

They focus their practice upon
Every one of the qualities
That approach to enlightenment.


	[867]
,DE YI RNAM PAR SMIN PAS NA,
,RAB ‘THAB BRAL GNAS LHA RGYAL ‘GYUR,
,’JIG TSOGS LTA BA RAB ‘BYUNG BA,
,KUN NAS ‘JOMS BYED MKHAS PA YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS PA BZHIN ‘JUG PAR YANG BKOD PA’O,,

And when these deeds have ripened,
They become the Lords of Gods
In that high place, “Free of Strife.”

They are masters at obliterating
That high form of the view
Of the destruction of the construct.


[868]
BYANG PHYOGS SO BDUN NI DRAN PA NYER GZHAG LA SOGS PA LAM SDE TSAN BDUN NO,,

The “37 qualities of enlightenment,” by the way, consist of seven different groups of qualities, such as the different forms of awareness.


[869]
DRAN PA NYER GZHAG BZHI NI, LUS DANG TSOR BA DANG SEMS DANG CHOS DRAN PA NYER GZHAG GO

The four forms of awareness are those of [1] the body; of [2] feelings; of [3] the mind; and of [4] things.


[870]
,YANG DAG PAR SPONG BA BZHI NI DGE BA’I CHOS MA SKYES PA SKYED PA DANG, SKYES PA RNAMS SPEL BA DANG, MI DGE BA MA SKYES PA MI SKYED PA DANG, SKYES PA YANG DAG PAR SPONG BA’O,,

The four perfect freedoms are [5] to give rise to goodness which has not yet begun; [6] to increase goodness which has already begun; [7] not to give rise to wrong which has not yet begun; and [8] to give up wrong which has already begun.


[871]
RDZU ‘PHRUL GYI RKANG PA BZHI NI, ‘DUN PA DANG, BRTZON ‘GRUS DANG, SEMS DANG DPYOD PA’I TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI RDZU ‘PHRUL GYI RKANG PA’O,,

The four legs of the miraculous consist of legs of miraculous concentration related to [9] aspiration; [10] joyful effort; [11] thinking; and [12] acting.


[872]
DBANG PO LNGA NI, DAD PA DANG BRTZON ‘GRUS DANG, DRAN PA DANG TING NGE ‘DZIN DANG, SHES RAB KYI DBANG PO’O,,

The five powers are those of [13] faith; [14] joyful effort; [15] mindfulness; [16] concentration; and [17] wisdom.


[873]
STOBS LNGA NI, DAD PA LA SOGS PA’I STOBS SO,,

The five forces are those of [18-22] faith & the rest.


[874]
BYANG CHUB KYI YAN LAG BDUN NI, DRAN PA DANG CHOS RAB TU RNAM PAR ‘BYED [f. 70a] PA DANG, BRTZON ‘GRUS DANG DGA’ BA DANG, SHIN TU SBYANGS PA DANG TING NGE ‘DZIN DANG, BTANG SNYOMS YANG DAG BYANG CHUB KYI YAN LAG STE YANG DAG MAN CHAD SNGA MA DRUG GI MTHAR YANG SBYAR RO,,

The seven components of enlightenment are [23] awareness; [24] perfect discrimination between things; [25] joyful effort; [26] joy itself; [27] practiced ease; [28] concentration; and [29] the component of enlightenment which consists of equanimity (also add this last phrase to the beginning of all the first six).


[875]
‘PHAGS LAM YAN LAG BRGYAD NI, YANG DAG PA’I LTA BA DANG RTOG PA DANG, NGAG DANG LAS KYI MTHA’ DANG, ‘TSO BA DANG RTZOL BA DANG, DRAN PA DANG TING NGE ‘DZIN YANG DAG ‘PHAGS PA’I LAM YAN LAG GO, YANG DAG PA’I ZHES PA RTOG PA MAN CHAD LA SBYAR ZHING, YANG DAG PA’I ‘PHAGS PA’I LAM YAN LAG CES PA SNGA MA BDUN GYI MTHAR YANG SBYAR RO,,

The eight components of the path of the realized ones are [30] the component of the path of the realized consisting of correct views and [31] thoughts; [32] speech and [33] the point of actions; [34] livelihood and [35] effort; and [36] awareness and [37] concentration.  The expression “component of the path of the realized consisting of” should be applied to the beginning of each of the latter seven here as well.


[876]
DE LA SA DANG PO NI BSLAB PA’I RTEN DANG, BSLAB PA’I NGO BO LA GNYIS PAR LHAG PA’I TSUL KHRIMS DANG, GSUM PAR LHAG PA’I SEMS KYI BSLAB PA DANG, BZHI PA NAS DRUG PA’I BAR GSUM LA LHAG PA’I SHES RAB KYI BSLAB PA GSUM ‘JOG PA LA, SA ‘DIR BYANG PHYOGS SO BDUN RAGS PA DANG PHRA BA LA CHES MKHAS PA’I SHES RAB KYI BSLAB PA CAN DU ‘GYUR RO,,

We can say that the first of the bodhisattva levels is the foundation for the trainings.  Then come the levels which actually consist of the trainings: the second level consists of the extraordinary training in ethical living; the third consists of the extraordinary training in thinking; and the fourth to the sixth consist of the extraordinary training in wisdom.  The present level then consists of an extraordinary training in wisdom where one has mastered, to a high degree, both gross and more subtle forms of the 37 qualities of enlightenment.



Things are not themselves

	[877]
[IV.2b]
,RANG DU LTA BA DANG ‘BREL YONGS SU ZAD,

		And then everything related
		To seeing things as themselves
		Is finished off completely.


[878]
GSUM PA NI, RANG STE PHRA BA’I ‘JIG LTA’I BDAG TU LTA BA DANG ‘BREL BA STE DE SNGON DU ‘GRO BA’I BDAG DANG, SEMS CAN SOGS RANG RKYA BA’I RDZAS YOD DU ‘DZIN PA RAGS PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG DANG BDAG GI BAR ‘DZIN PA DANG, PHUNG KHAMS SKYE MCHED LA BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN RNAMS YONGS SU ZAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

This brings us to our third point from above: a description of what it is we rid ourselves of at the fourth level.  And then everything related to seeing things as themselves is finished off completely—which is to say, everything related to seeing things as themselves as we do this in the subtle form of the view of destruction.  This involves the tendency to believe in a self-nature which is the precursor for this view; the tendency to believe in the gross form of a self-nature to a person in the case where we are holding living beings & such as existing in a self-standing, substantial way (in addition to thinking this way about what is possessed by such a being); and the tendency to believe in a self-nature to the parts of a person: the heaps, the categories, & the doors of sense—thinking that these are real.


[879]
ZAD PA’I DON YANG SA DE’I SPANG BYAR GYUR PA’I BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS KYI SA BON SPANGS [f. 70b] PA YIN GYI, THAMS CAD ZAD PA MIN NO, ,MDOS KYANG ‘JIG LTA LHAN SKYES YOD PAR BSTAN NO,,

When we say “finished off” here, what we mean is that we have rid ourselves of the seeds for the forms of a belief in a self-nature which are the particular types that we eliminate at this level; this is not though to say that we have rid ourselves of all their possible forms.  Sutra too explains that, at this point, we still possess the innate form of the view of destruction.


	[880]
	[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA BZHI PA’O,,

This concludes the fourth wish for enlightenment,
or chapter, of Entering the Middle Way.
	

[881]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA BZHI PA’I RNAM PAR BSHAD PA’O,,

This concludes our explanation of the fourth ultimate “wish for enlightenment,” or chapter, of An Illumination of the True Thought, an expanded explanation of Entering the Middle Way.





Chapter 5
Invincible



Chapter 5
Invincible

[882]
,,LNGA PA SA LNGA PA SBYANG DKA’ BA BSHAD PA LA GNYIS, SA LNGA PA’I NGES PA’I TSIG BSHAD PA, BSAM GTAN LHAG CING BDEN PA LA MKHAS PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

This brings us to the fifth major division from above, which is an explanation of “Invincible,” the fifth bodhisattva level.  We proceed in two steps: an explanation of the literal meaning of this level’s name; and a description of how, at this level, our practice of the perfection of concentration reaches a higher level—and we become masters on the subject of reality.



Invincible over the demons

	[883]
[V.1]
Sarvaiḥ sa mārair api naiva jetuṃ
śakyo mahātmā bhuvi durjayāyām,		
Dhyānādhikaḥ sanmati satya sūkṣma
svarūpa bodhe’pyatikauśalāptaḥ.

[V.1a]
,BDAG NYID CHE DE BDUD RNAMS KUN GYIS KYANG,
,SBYANG DKA’I SA LA PHAM PAR NUS MA YIN,

		These great beings cannot be defeated,
		Even by each & every demon;

		And so the level is known
		As “Invincible.”
					

[884]
DANG PO NI, BDAG NYID CHEN PO SA LNGA PA SBYANG DKA’ BA LA GNAS PA DE NI, ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS THAMS CAD NA GNAS PA’I LHA’I BU’I BDUD RNAMS KUN GYIS KYANG PHAM PAR BYA BAR NUS PA MA YIN NA, DE DAG LAS GZHAN PA’I BDUD KYI BKA’ NYAN PA BRAN LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYIS LTA CI SMOS, DE YI PHYIR SA ‘DI’I MING SBYANG DKA’ BA ZHES BYA’O,,

Here is the first.  These great beings—bodhisattvas who have reached the fifth level, known as “Invincible”—are people who cannot be defeated even by each & every one of those demons, in all the worlds of the universe, known as “children of the being of pleasure.”  Needless to say then they could never be beaten by beings like the minions of these demons—by those who are their servants.  As such, this level is itself called “Invincible.”


[885]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,LNGA PA SHIN TU SBYANG DKA’ BDUD,
,KUN GYIS SHIN TU THUB DKA’I PHYIR,
,’PHAGS PA’I BDEN SOGS PHRA MO’I DON,
,SHES LA MKHAS PA ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR,

As the String of Precious Jewels puts it,

The fifth is known as
Completely “Invincible,”

For it is completely difficult
For all the demons to beat us.

This is when we become a master
In understanding the subtle meaning
Of things like the truths of the realized.


	[886]
,DE YI RNAM PAR SMIN PAS NA,
,DGA’ LDAN GNAS KYI LHA RGYAL ‘GYUR,
,MU STEGS BYED PA THAMS CAD KYI,
,NYON MONGS LTA GNAS ZLOG BYED PA,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And when this seed has ripened,
A person becomes a Lord of Gods
In the Heaven of Happiness;

They turn back all the negative thoughts
And mistaken ideas of every
Person with lower views.



An excellent mind

	[887]
[V.1b]
,BSAM GTAN LHAG CING BLO BZANG BDEN RANG BZHIN,
,ZHIB MO RTOGS LA’ANG SHIN TU MKHAS PA ‘THOB,

		They reach a high point
		In their practice of meditation,
		As well as an excellent mind:

		And a high degree of mastery
		In a very fine state of mind
		Comprehending the nature
		Of the truths.
				

[888]
GNYIS PA NI, SA LNGA PA ‘DIR PHAR PHYIN BCU’I NANG NAS BSAM GTAN GYI PHAR PHYIN NYID CHES LHAG PAR ‘GYUR RO, ,DE LTAR BSTAN PA NA SBYIN PA NAS BRTZON ‘GRUS KYI PHAR PHYIN BZHI LHAG PAR ‘GYUR BA, SNGON NYID NAS THOB ZIN PAR SHES PAS, LHAG MA DRUG GI NANG NAS ZHES SHES PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As for how we become masters of reality, here at the fifth bodhisattva level we reach an extremely high point in our practice, specifically, of the perfection of meditation—from among the ten perfections.  When it is phrased this way, we automatically understand that the four perfections from giving on up to joyful effort have already by this point been attained in a higher degree.  And that’s why we speak of “the remaining six.”


[889]
DE YANG BSAM GTAN GYI PHAR PHYIN GYI MI MTHUN PHYOGS RNAM [f. 71a] G-YENG SOGS KYI NYES PAS GTAN MI BRDZI BA ‘DIR THOB PA ‘DRE BA, SHES RAB KYI PHAR PHYIN SOGS LA ‘DIR MED PA’O,,

Here we have attained a point where we are forever free from oppression by those things which act against the perfection of meditation: problems such as mental distraction.  And because they are intermixed with the meditation here, the perfections of wisdom & the rest are as well free of them.


[890]
BSAM GTAN LHAG PAR MA ZAD BLO BZANG STE ‘PHAGS PA’I BDEN PA’I RANG BZHIN TE RANG GI NGO BO SHES PA ZHIB MOS KHONG DU CHUD DGOS PA PHRA MO RTOGS PA LA’ANG SHIN TU MKHAS PA ‘THOB PAS, ‘DIR BDEN PA RAGS PA DANG PHRA BA LA MKHAS PA’I LHAG PA’I SHES RAB CAN DU ‘GYUR RO,,

Not only do we attain an exceeding level of our meditation here; we also reach an “excellent mind”—meaning a high degree of mastery in which we comprehend the nature, or true essence, of the truths of the realized: something which can only be grasped by a very fine state of mind.  As such, by this point we also possess an exceeding form of wisdom, versed in both the gross & more subtle forms of reality.


[891]
‘DIR SA BCU PA LAS SA LNGA PA BA DES SDUG KUN DANG, ‘GOG LAM GYI BDEN PA BZHI LA MKHAS PA DANG, DE NAS KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA LA MKHAS PA GNYIS SO SOR GSUNGS PA LA, YAB SRAS MJAL BA DANG, DBU MA LAS KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA GNYIS SU NGES PAR GSUNGS PAS, BDEN GNYIS LAS THA DAD PAR BDEN BZHI GA LA YOD,

In the Ten Levels, we see the the bodhisattva at the fifth level described both as a master of the four truths—those of suffering & its source; and those of the end of suffering & the path to it—and as a master of the pair of deceptive reality & ultimate reality; the two separately.  Then again, the sutra called The Meeting of the Father & the Son, and The Middle Way, both state that the truths are fixed at only two: deceptive truth & ultimate truth.  How then could we ever say that the four truths existed somehow separately from the two truths?


[892]
CES PA’I LAN DU, BDEN PA GNYIS SU MA ‘DUS PA’I BDEN PA MED MOD KYANG, SPANG BYA KUN NYON GYI PHYOGS LA KUN ‘BYUNG RGYU DANG, SDUG BSNGAL ‘BRAS BU DANG, BLANG BYA RNAM BYANG GI PHYOGS LA LAM BDEN RGYU DANG, ‘GOG BDEN ‘BRAS BUR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BDEN BZHI BSHAD PA DANG,

In response to this question we can agree that there is no truth which is not subsumed by the two truths.  Nonetheless, we do speak of four different truths, in the sense that things we need to rid ourselves of—the side of the universe involved with negative emotions—are presented as two (a cause, the truth of the source of pain; and a result, the truth of the pain itself) while the enlightened side of the universe is also presented as two (again a cause, the truth of the path, and a result, the truth of the end of suffering).


[893]
DE LA YANG SDUG KUN DANG LAM BDEN KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA DANG, ‘GOG BDEN DON DAM BDEN PAR ‘GREL PA LAS BSHAD DO,,

And the commentary further states that the truths of suffering & its source, as well as the truth of the path to the end of suffering, consist of deceptive truth; while the truth of the end of suffering consists of ultimate truth.


[894]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS KYANG, MYANG ‘DAS DON DAM BDEN PA DANG, BDEN PA GZHAN GSUM KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR GSUNGS TE MYANG ‘DAS NI ‘GOG BDEN NO,,

The commentary to the Sixty Verses on Reasoning states as well that nirvana is ultimate reality, while the other three truths are deceptive reality; and nirvana consists of the truth of the end of pain.


[895]
[f. 71b] GZHAN YANG RIGS PA DRUG CU PA’I ‘GREL PAR ‘GOG BDEN MNGON SUM DU SHES PA STON PAS ZHAL GYIS BZHES LA, DNGOS POR SMRA BA MNGON SUM TSAD MA DNGOS PO RANG MTSAN GYI YUL CAN DU ‘DOD PA LA DE MI RUNG BA DANG,

Moreover, this same commentary to the Sixty Verses states that the Teacher held the position that the truth of the end of suffering could be perceived directly; whereas the schools which say that functional things truly exist assert that direct forms of accurate perception can only take, as their object, things which are expressions of archetypes—and so for them, this would be incorrect.


[896]
RANG LUGS LA ‘GOG PA MNGON SUM DU SHES PA MNYAM GZHAG ZAG MED KYI YE SHES KYIS, ,DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON RTOGS PA’I STENG NAS BSGRUBS PAS, ‘GOG BDEN KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA YIN NA RNAM GZHAG DE DAG GTAN MI RUNG ZHING,

According to our own school, immaculate wisdom engaged in deep meditation, a direct perception of the end of suffering, sees both the object of suchness and—on top of that—this end.  As such, saying that the truth of the end of suffering is part of deceptive reality would—according to this presentation—be completely mistaken.


[897]
MYANG ‘DAS MNGON DU BYAS PA’I TSE YANG DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON MNGON SUM DU RTOGS DGOS PAR ‘BAD PA DU MAS BSGRUBS PAS NA, ‘GOG BDEN KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR SMRA BA NI, MTHA’ MA CHOD PA’O,,

When one brings about their nirvana too they must perceive, directly, suchness as their object—and this must be accomplished with countless efforts.  As such, those who say that the truth of the end of suffering is part of deceptive truth have truly failed to get to the bottom of this question.


[898]
GZHI ‘GA’ ZHIG GI STENG DU DGAG BYA BDEN PA BCAD PA LA DON DAM BDEN PAR BYED KYANG, DON DAM BDEN PA YIN TSAD THAMS CAD KYI DGAG BYA SHES BYA LA MI SRID PAS MA KHYAB STE, CHOS DBYINGS BSTOD PA LAS,

With regard to certain objects, we arrive at ultimate reality by disqualifying the object which emptiness denies: something real.  It is not though the case that with every example of ultimate truth, the thing which we deny is something which is impossible among all the things there are—for as A Praise of the Realm of Is puts it,


[899]
,GANG ZHIG KUN TU MA SHES NA,
,SRID PA GSUM DU RNAM ‘KHOR LA,
,SEMS CAN KUN LA NGES GNAS PA’I,
,CHOS KYI DBYINGS LA PHYAG ‘TSAL ‘DUD,

I bow down to the realm of Is,
Something which without question exists
Within every living being;

And something which,
Because they cannot see it,

Forces them all to circle
In the three realms of existence.


[900]
,GANG ZHIG ‘KHOR BA’I RGYUR GYUR PA,
,DE NYID SPYAD {%SBYANG} PA BYAS PA LAS,
,DAG PA DE NYID MYANG NGAN ‘DAS,
,CHOS KYI SKU YANG DE NYID DO,

When we take the thing
Which is the cause of the cycle
And clean ourselves of it,

That cleanness is itself nirvana—
And the body of reality
Is that very same thing.


[901]
ZHES CHOS NYID DRI MA DANG BCAS PA’I DRI MA SBYANGS PA NA, MYANG ‘DAS DANG CHOS KYI SKUR GSUNGS PA LTAR, DAG PA’I CHOS NYID KYI DGAG BYA DRI MAR GSUNGS PA DU MA ZHIG YOD PA’I PHYIR DANG, CHOS NYID DRI BRAL DU SONG BA MI SRID NA, NGAL BA ‘BRAS MED DU ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR DANG, SRID NA [f. 72a] DE’I DGAG BYA SHES BYA LA YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What this is saying is that—if we can clean away the impurity possessed by the nature of all things which comes with impurity—this then is nirvana, and the body of reality.  There are many such references which state that the thing which a pure form of the nature of all things denies is an impurity; and if it were not possible that the nature of things could ever be freed of impurity, then all the trouble we are taking to do so would be fruitless.  If it is possible to free them from impurity, then we would have to say that the thing they denied was something that could be counted among all existing things.


[902]
DPER NA RI BONG GI RVA MED PA’I DGAG BYA RI BONG GI RVA SHES BYA LA MI SRID KYANG, DGAG BYA SHES BYA LA YOD PA’I BUM PA BKAG PA’I BUM MED RI BONG GI RVA MED DU ‘JOG NUS PA BZHIN NO,,

A rabbit’s horn—the object denied by the non-existence of such horns, for example—is something which cannot be counted among all the things which exist in the universe.  We can, however, say that the absence of a water pitcher [in a particular place]—where the thing we deny, the water pitcher, is something that can be counted among all the things which exist—can be posited with as much assurance as the absence of rabbit horns.


[903]
DAG MA DAG GI CHOS CAN SPYI LA KHYAB PA’I CHOS NYID KYI DBANG DU BYAS NA NI, BDAG GNYIS BKAG PA LTA BU DGAG BYA SHES BYA LA MI SRID PA TZAM BKAG PA LA BYED KYANG,

When we’re talking about the nature of things as a general category which contains members that can be either pure or impure, we are talking about a case where we are denying a particular object which cannot be counted among all the things which exist: we are, for example, denying the existence of the two forms of a self-nature.


[904]
CHOS CAN RIM GYIS DRI MAS JE DAG TU SONG BA NA DE’I CHOS NYID KYANG DRI MAS JE DAG TU ‘GRO BAS, CHOS CAN KHYAD PAR CAN LA NI CHOS NYID KYANG DAG PA PHYOGS GCIG PA TZAM GYIS MI CHOG GI ,RANG RANG GI SKABS KYI GLO BUR GYI DRI MAS KYANG DAG PA RE DGOS LA DE NYID LA ‘GOG BDEN ZER BA YIN NO,,

When we are speaking though about something which is purified in steps, and thus becoming more & more pure, we can though say that the true nature of this thing is also becoming increasingly clean of impurities.  And so even though we cannot say that—with an extraordinary object—the true nature of a thing is but partially pure, it is the case that it must become, at different stages in its existence, clean of impurities which are circumstantial; and that we can speak of that cleanliness itself as the truth of the end of suffering.


[905]
SA BCU PA LAS SA ‘DIR MTSAN NYID KYI BDEN PA LA MKHAS PA SOGS KYI BDEN PA’I MING ‘DOGS MANG DU BYUNG YANG, DE DAG KYANG BDEN PA GNYIS SU MI ‘DU BA MIN NO,,

We should note finally that—although the Ten Levels includes a long list of things called “truths” for this level (such as “they become masters of the truth of the defining qualities of things”)—it is not the case that any of these is not already subsumed by the two truths.


	[906]
	[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA LNGA PA’O,,

This concludes the fifth wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
 	of Entering the Middle Way.


[907]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA LNGA PA’I RNAM PAR BSHAD PA’O,,

This concludes our explanation of the fifth ultimate “wish for enlightenment,” or chapter, of An Illumination of the True Thought, an expanded explanation of Entering the Middle Way.






Chapter 6
Direct Perception





Chapter 6
Direct Perception

[908]
,,GNYIS PA SA DRUG PA MNGON DU GYUR PA BSHAD PA LA BZHI, SA’I NGES TSIG DANG SHER PHYIN LHAG PAR BSTAN PA, SHES RAB KYI PHAR PHYIN GYI BSNGAGS PA, ZAB MO RTEN ‘BYUNG GZIGS PA’I DE KHO NA NYID BSHAD PA, SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS MJUG BSDU BA’O,,

We come now to the second great division of our presentation of the ten levels: an explanation of Direct Perception, the sixth of the ten.  We proceed in four steps: a presentation of the literal meaning of the level’s name, as well as a description of how we reach a higher degree of the perfection of wisdom at this level; a praise of this perfection; an explanation of suchness for those who see the subtle form of creation in dependence; and a concluding summary for the section, by way of describing the high qualities of this level.



About the name “Direct Perception”

	[909]
	[VI.1]
Samāhite cetasi saṃsthito’sau
saṃbuddha dharmābhimukho’bhimukhyām,
Idaṃ pratītyodaya dṛṣṭa tattvaḥ
prajñā vihārāt tu nirodham eti.

,MNGON DU PHYOGS PAR MNYAM BZHAG
SEMS [204a] GNAS TE,
,RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS CHOS LA
MNGON PHYOGS SHING,
,’JIG RTEN ‘BYUNG BA’I DE NYID MTHONG BA DE,
,SHES RAB GNAS PAS ‘GOG PA THOB PAR ‘GYUR,

A bodhisattva at the level of Direct Perception [f. 204a]
Is residing in an exceptional state of meditation.

They are directly approaching the qualities
Of a totally enlightened being,
And they have seen this one suchness:
Of how all things in the world occur.

They reside in wisdom, and have thus attained
The ending of certain undesirable qualities.
			

[910]
DANG PO NI, SA LNGA PAR BSAM GTAN GYI PHAR PHYIN YONGS SU DAG PA THOB PAS, SA DRUG PA [f. 72b] MNGON DU PHYOGS PA STE GYUR PAR MNYAM PAR BZHAG PA’I SEMS PHUL DU BYUNG BA LA GNAS TE,

Here is the first.  We start with a bodhisattva who has, at the fifth level, attained a very pure form of the perfection of meditation—and who is now residing in an exceptional state of meditation which itself has become the sixth level, called “Direct Perception.”


[911]
DE LA BRTEN NAS RTEN CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM GYI ZAB MO’I DE KHO NA NYID MTHONG BA’I BYANG SEMS SA DRUG PA LA GNAS PAS NI, SHES RAB KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA PHUL DU BYUNG BA LA GNAS PAS ‘GOG PA THOB PAR ‘GYUR GYI,

Consider this person—the bodhisattva staying at the sixth level, who from the foundation of this meditation has seen that most profound object, suchness, relating to nothing more than this one factor: that all things occur through dependence & connection.  They are someone who is residing in an exceptional form of the perfection of wisdom; and thus they have attained the ending of certain undesirable qualities.


[912]
DE’I SNGA ROL SA LNGA PA SOGS SU NI ‘GOG PA THOB PA MIN TE, SHER PHYIN PHUL DU BYUNG BA’I LHAG PA MED PA’I PHYIR TE, SBYIN SOGS KYI PHAR PHYIN LNGA PHUL DU BYUNG BA TZAM GYIS NI ‘GOG PA THOB PAR MI NUS SO,,

Previous to this point, at the fifth and other levels, it is not the case that we have attained this ending—because we have yet to attain a higher degree, an excellence, of the perfection of wisdom.  And this is because reaching an extraordinary level of the first five perfections (giving & the rest) is not by itself enough to allow one to attain this ending.


[913]
DE LTAR SHES RAB LHAG PA’I SGO NAS GZUGS BRNYAN DANG ‘DRA BA’I CHOS NYID MNGON DU GYUR PA’I PHYIR DANG, SA LNGA PAR LAM GYI BDEN PA LA DMIGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS ‘THOB PA LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PA’I PHYIR, SA ‘DI LA MNGON DU GYUR BA ZHES BYA’O,,

And so this level is known as “Direct Perception,” first because the very nature of things—the way in which things are like a reflection in a mirror—has, through the exceptional degree of wisdom here, become something we perceive directly.  Moreover, we have at the fifth level perceived the truth of the path; and now here we are directly approaching the attainment of the qualities of a totally enlightened being.


[914]
RGYU MTSAN GNYIS PA’I DON NI ‘GREL BSHAD LAS, SHES PA DANG SHES BYA MI DMIGS PA’I LAM MNGON DU GYUR PA LA ‘CHAD MOD KYANG, SA LNGA PAR LAM BDEN LA DMIGS PA NI BDEN BZHI’I THA MA SMOS PAS NA, DER BDEN BZHI RAGS PA DANG PHRA BA LA MKHAS PA ‘THOB PAS, SA DRUG PAR BDEN PA BZHI LA MKHAS PA’I SHES RAB RDZOGS PA’I DON YIN LA,

Regarding this second rationale for the name, the Explanation does admittedly interpret it as meaning that we are having a direct perception of the path where we no longer see any mind, or anything known by that mind.  It has though been stated that at the fifth level we are focusing on the “truth of the path”; and this specific mention of the last of the four truths is meant to indicate that—because we have attained a state of mastery in both the gross & subtle aspects of the four truths—then here at the sixth level we have reached a complete form of wisdom which has mastered the four truths. 


[915]
RGYU MTSAN DANG POS NI RTEN ‘BREL LUGS ‘BYUNG DANG LUGS LDOG LA MKHAS PA’I SHES RAB KYI BSLAB PA RDZOGS PAR STON PAS, SHES RAB KYI BSLAB PA DE GNYIS RDZOGS PA’I SGO NAS, BDEN [f. 73a] PA DANG RTEN ‘BREL MNGON DU GYUR PA’I DON NO,,

The first rationale for the name is meant to indicate that we have reached a complete form of wisdom where one has mastered the concept of interdependence, both in its forward order & in its reverse order.  And so the point here is that, for us, the training of wisdom has been perfected in these two different ways—and thus we have accomplished a direct percepton of both the truth & interdependence.


[916]
DE LTAR NA SA ‘DIR SHES RAB KYI BSLAB PA GSUM RDZOGS PA DANG, ZHI GNAS JI TZAM KHYAD ZHUGS PA TZAM GYIS LHAG MTHONG DE TZAM DU KHYAD ZHUGS PAR ‘GYUR LA, SA LNGA PAR BSAM GTAN GYI PHAR PHYIN PHUL DU BYUNG BA THOB PAS, DE LA BRTEN NAS ‘DIR SHER PHYIN PHUL DU BYUNG BA YIN NO,,

And so by this level, we have completed three different forms of the training of wisdom.  And the more exceptional our practice of quietude becomes, then the more exceptional does our practice of high insight become.  At the fifth level, we have attained an extraordinary form of the perfection of meditation; and so at this one we attain an extraordinary form of the perfection of wisdom which uses that meditation as its foundation.


[917]
DE’I PHYIR ‘GOG PA LA SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG PA THUN MONG MA YIN PA ‘DI NAS ‘THOB PA YIN NO,,

And thus it is from this level that we attain a unique form of deep meditation upon the ending of certain undesirable qualities.


[918]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,DRUG PA MNGON PHYOGS ZHES BYA STE,
,SANGS RGYAS CHOS LA MNGON PHYOGS PHYIR,
,ZHI GNAS LHAG MTHONG GOMS PA YIS,
,’GOG PA THOB PAS RGYAS PA’I PHYIR,

The String of Precious Jewels says as well:

The sixth is known as “Direct Perception”
Because we are directly approaching
The qualities of the Enlightened;

And because our mind is opening,
For we have achieved an ending
Through our meditation combining
Quietude & high vision.
	

	[919]
,DE YI RNAM PAR SMIN PAS NA,
,LHA YI RGYAL PO RAB ‘PHRUL ‘GYUR,
,NYAN THOS RNAMS KYIS MI ‘PHROGS PAS,
,LHAG PA’I NGA RGYAL CAN ZHI BYED,
CES GSUNGS TE RAB ‘PHRUL NI ‘PHRUL DGA’ ‘O,,

When these seeds ripen,
We become a king of the gods,
In the Land of Emanations.

We can no longer be stolen away
By the Listeners, and we put to rest
The overweening sort of pride.

The “Land of Emanations” here, by the way, is a reference to the level known as “Delighting in Emanation.”



A praise of the perfection of wisdom

	[920]
	[VI.2]
Ekena puṃsākṣimatā yatheṣṭaṃ
deśaṃ samasto’ndha gaṇaḥ sukhena,
Ākṛṣyate tadvad ihākṣi hīnān
ādāya dhīr yāti guṇāñ Jinatvam.

,JI LTAR LONG BA’I TSOGS KUN BDE BLAG TU,
,MIG LDAN SKYES BU GCIG GIS ‘DOD PA YI,
,YUL DU ‘KHRID PA DE BZHIN ‘DIR YANG BLOS,
,MIG NYAMS YON TAN BLANGS TE RGYAL NYID ‘GRO,

Think of how a single person with sight
Can easily lead an entire group of blind people
To a place where they would like to go.

Just so, here our intelligence
Takes up the fine qualities we possess—
Those with imperfect eyes—

And they travel to that one state
Of becoming a Victor.	


[921]
GNYIS PA NI, SHER PHYIN LAS GZHAN PA’I SBYIN SOGS KYI TSOGS RNAMS, ‘BRAS BU’I SAR BGROD PA SHER PHYIN LA RAG LAS PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

This brings us to the second step from above: a praise of the perfection of wisdom.  The point of this section is to demonstrate that—for the accumulation of good seeds from the perfection of giving & other perfections (other than that of wisdom) to help us travel to the level of the final goal—we will need to rely upon this very perfection of wisdom. 


[922]
JI LTAR TE DPER NA SKYES BU MIG DANG LDAN PA GCIG GIS, LONG BA’I TSOGS KUN TE MTHA’ DAG ,’GRO BAR ‘DOD PA YI YUL DU BDE BLAG TU ‘KHRID PAR BYED PA

Think of how, for example, a single person with sight can easily lead an entire (which is to say, every one of a) group of blind people to a place where they would like to go.


[923]
DE BZHIN DU, LAM GYI SKABS ‘DIR YANG BLO STE SHER PHYIN GYIS KYANG, DE NYID LTA BA’I MIG NYAMS PA’I SBYIN SOGS KYI YON TAN RNAMS BLANGS PA STE YONGS SU BZUNG STE,

Here at this point on the path, it’s just the same.  Our intelligence—which is to say, the perfection of wisdom within us—takes up, or takes by the hand, the fine qualities we possess, such as giving & the rest; fine qualities which nonetheless still possess imperfect forms of the eyes we use to see suchness.


[924]
RGYAL BA ‘BRAS BU NYID KYI GO ‘PHANG DU ‘GRO STE, SHER PHYIN NI LAM YANG DAG PA DANG DE MIN PA GNYIS PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR [f. 73b] MTHONG BA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Together then they travel to that one great goal, of becoming a Victor.  And this is because the perfection of wisdom sees, without any error at all, what is a perfect path, and what is not.


[925]
‘PHAGS PA SDUD PA LAS KYANG,
,DMUS LONG DMIGS BU MED PA BYE BA KHRAG KHRIG RNAMS,
,LAM YANG MI SHES GRONG KHYER ‘JUG PAR GA LA ‘GYUR,
,SHES RAB MED NA MIG MED PHA ROL PHYIN LNGA ‘DI,
,DMIGS BU MED PAS BYANG CHUB REG PAR NUS MA YIN,
ZHES DANG,

As the exalted Brief Presentation also puts it,

You can have a crowd of a hundred million blind people,
But still they cannot know the way, and will never reach The City.

Those five perfections without sight, without wisdom,
Are just as blind, and can never arrive at Enlightenment.


[926]
RDO RJE GCOD PA LAS KYANG, DPER NA MIG DANG LDAN PA’I MI ZHIG MUN PAR ZHUGS NAS, CI YANG MI MTHONG BA BZHIN DU GANG DNGOS POR LHUNG BAS SBYIN PA YONGS SU GTONG BA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAR BLTA BAR BYA’O,,

The Diamond Cutter Sutra says as well,

Think of the example of a person who has eyes to see, but who is sitting in the dark.  They see nothing at all.   You should consider a bodhisattva who has fallen into things, and who then practices the act of giving, to be just like this person.


[927]
RAB ‘BYOR ‘DI LTA STE DPER NA NAM LANGS TE NYI MA SHAR NAS MIG DANG LDAN PA’I MIS GZUGS RNAM PA SNA TSOGS DAG MTHONG BA DE BZHIN DU GANG DNGOS POR MA LHUNG BAS, SBYIN PA YONGS SU GTONG BA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPAR BLTA BAR BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS TE TSUL KHRIMS LA SOGS PA LA YANG DE DANG ‘DRA’O,,

And now, Subhuti, think of this person, someone with eyes to see, as dawn breaks and the sun rises into the sky; think how then they see a whole variety of different forms.  You should consider a bodhisattva who has not fallen into things, and who then practices the act of giving, to be just like this person.

And it is just the same with the perfections of an ethical life, & the rest.



A promise to explain the profound

	[928]
	[VI.3]
Dharmān sa gambhīratarān avaiti
yathāgamenāpi ca yuktitaś ca,
Tathārya Nāgārjuna nīti tas tān
yathā sthita prakriyayā bravīmi.

,JI LTAR DE YIS CHES ZAB CHOS RTOGS PA,
,LUNG DANG GZHAN YANG RIGS PAS YIN PAS NA,
,DE LTAR ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB GZHUNG LUGS LAS,
,JI STAR GNAS PA’I LUGS BZHIN BRJOD PAR BYA,

I shall now impart to you the manner
Of the true nature of things,

Following the scriptural tradition
Of the realized being Nagarjuna:

Realizing that thing infinitely profound
In just that way, utilizing the scriptures
And, beyond them, reasoning.


[929]
GSUM PA LA LNGA, ZAB MO’I DON BSHAD PAR DAM BCA’ BA, ZAB MO’I DON BSHAD PA’I SNOD NGOS BZUNG BA, DE LA BSHAD NA YON TAN ‘BYUNG TSUL, SNOD LDAN GYI GANG ZAG LA NYAN PAR BSKUL BA, RTEN ‘BYUNG GI DE NYID JI LTAR BSHAD PA’I TSUL LO,,

With this we have reached the third step in this section: an explanation of suchness for those who see the subtle form of dependent events.  This step is divided into five further parts: a pledge to explain that most profound object; identifying the kind of person who is a worthy vessel for an explanation of the profound; what kinds of good qualities this person develops, once they have received this explanation; words urging those who may be a worthy vessel to listen well to this teaching; and an explanation of how we explain the true nature of dependent events.


[930]
DANG PO NI, SNGAR SA DRUG PA PAS RTEN ‘BYUNG MTHONG BA NA, ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS ‘DI ‘BYUNG BA’I DE KHO NA NYID MTHONG BAR JI LTAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,

Here is the first.  “Let’s say it’s given,” one may begin, “that this bodhisattva at the sixth level has—previously—seen how things are created through dependence.  Just how is it that they then see the suchness of how each thing occurs in dependence upon another?”


[931]
‘DI’I LAN DU ‘GREL PAR DE’I RANG GI NGO BO NI MA RIG PA’I LING TOG ‘THUG POS, BLO’I MIG MA LUS PAR G-YOGS PA’I BDAG CAG GI YUL DU MI ‘GRO YI, DRUG PA LA SOGS PA [f. 74a] SA GANG {%GONG} MA LA GNAS PA’I YUL DU ‘GYUR BAS, KHO BO CAG LA DRI BAR BYA BA MIN GYI, GANG DAG STONG NYID LEGS PAR MTHONG BA’I MIG SMAN MA RIG PA’I LING TOG ‘JOMS PAS BSKUS PA’I BLO’I SPYAN, MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB KYI LING TOG DANG BRAL BA’I SANGS RGYAS DANG, BYANG SEMS DE DAG NYID LA SMRA BAR BYA’O,,

In response, the commentary says:

Its nature is not something that we can perceive, for the eyes of our mind are completely enwrapped in thick cataracts of misunderstanding.  It is though something which those at the higher bodhisattva levels—the sixth and so on—can perceive.  As such, we are not the ones you should be asking the question.  You should be talking to someone like the Buddhas, or those same bodhisattvas: to those whose eyes are free of the cataracts of misunderstanding, for they have been treated with the eye drops that allow one to see emptiness perfectly—and the cataracts that they had have been destroyed.


[932]
‘DIS NI DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON MNGON DU GYUR PA LA ‘DRI NA, DE RNAMS LA DRIS SHIG CES STON PAS, MIG SMAN BSKUS PAS MIG GSAL DU ‘GRO YI, MIG ‘DON PA MIN PA BZHIN DU

What this passage is saying is, “If you want to ask a question about the meaning of suchness, and what you want to know is how it is when seen directly, then you should be asking people like that.”  And if you then apply those eye drops to your own eyes, then your own sight will be made clear; but the solution of course is not that you should pluck your own eyes out.


[933]
STONG NYID MTHONG BA’I MIG SMAN BSKUS PAS, BLO’I MIG GSAL DU ‘GRO BA YIN GYI, YE SHES KYI MIG ‘DON PA MIN PAR SHES NA, ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG TU YE SHES MED CES PA’I SKUR ‘DEBS KYI LTA BA NGAN PAS MI GOS SO,,

Just so, the eyes of your mind will be made clear if you take the eye drops that allow you to see emptiness; but it’s not that you should pluck out these eyes of wisdom.  If you understand this fact, then you will never be sullied by that perverted viewpoint which claims that—during the deep meditation of this realized person, who is seeing emptiness directly—wisdom itself cannot exist.


[934]
GAL TE YUM GYI MDO DANG SA BCU PA SOGS KYI MDO RNAMS LAS, SHER PHYIN LA SPYOD PA’I BYANG SEMS KYIS RTEN ‘BYUNG GI DE NYID MTHONG BAR GSUNGS PA MA YIN NAM, DE’I PHYIR LUNG GI RJES SU ‘BRANGS NAS SHOD CIG CE NA,

“Isn’t it the case,” you may ask, “that sutras like the Mother Sutras, and The Ten Levels, state that bodhisattvas engaged in the perfection of wisdom are seeing the true nature of dependent events?  Can you give us then an explanation based upon this scriptural authority?”


[935]
LUNG GI DGONGS PA NGES PA YANG DKA’ BA’I PHYIR BDAG CAG ‘DRA BAS LUNG LAS KYANG DE KHO NA NYID BSTAN PAR MI NUS SO,,

And in response the passage is saying, “It is a difficult thing to ascertain the true intent of the scriptures; and so people like us would never be able to describe suchness, even just based upon what the scriptures say.”


[936]
RANG DBANG DU ‘CHAD PA’I DBANG DU BYAS NAS DE SKAD DU BRJOD KYI, DE KHO NA NYID STON PA’I BSTAN BCOS TSAD MAR GYUR PA’I SKYES BUS BYAS SHING, DES LUNG PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR ‘CHAD PA MTHONG BA LAS, LUNG GI DGONGS PA NGES NUS PAR STON PA NI,

This statement though is made with regard to interpreting the scriptures just by thinking up our own explanations.  The fact is that the classical commentaries which explain the concept of suchness were composed by people who only wrote of what they had experienced as true.  And if we see that their explanation of scripture is flawless, then yes of course we are able to ascertain what the scriptures really intend to say.


[937]
SA DRUG PA BA DE YIS CHES SHIN TU ZAB PA’I CHOS ZAB MO [f. 74b] JI LTAR RTOGS PA DE LTAR, ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYIS LUNG PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR MKHYEN NAS, DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LAS MDO SDE’I LUNG DANG, DER MA ZAD LUNG LAS GZHAN YANG RIGS PA DAG GIS CHOS RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID CHES GSAL BAR BSTAN PA YIN PAS NA,

This is demonstrated by the fact that the realized being Nagarjuna understood the meaning of the scriptures precisely, in just the way which this bodhisattva at the sixth level realizes that one profound object: that thing which is infinitely profound.  And then with extreme lucidity he described, in his Commentary upon the Middle Way, the very nature of all things—utilizing not only passages from the sutras, but also something beyond these passages: reasoning itself.


[938]
DE’I PHYIR ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYI GZHUNG LUGS LAS, DE KHO NA NYID JI LTAR BSTAN PA DE KHO NA LTAR, ZLA BA’I ZHABS KYIS KLU SGRUB DES NYE BAR BSTAN PA’I LUGS JI LTAR GNAS PA DE BZHIN DU BRJOD PAR BYA’O,,

As such, I shall now impart to you the manner in which the esteemed Chandrakirti specified the way in which the master Nagarjuna gave his teaching, following nothing other than the scriptural tradition through which this realized being, Nagarjuna, taught the true nature of things.


[939]
CI STE ‘PHAGS PA KLU LA NGES DON GYI LUNG GI DON PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR NGES PA JI LTAR YOD CE NA,

“How is it,” you may ask, “that we know that Nagarjuna, the realized, was able to ascertain—faultlessly—the import of those scriptures which relate what the Buddha most intended to teach?”


[940]
LUNG LAS SHES TE LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS,
,LHO PHYOGS BE DA’I YUL DU NI,
,DGE SLONG DPAL LDAN CHER GRAGS PA,
,DE MING KLU ZHES BOD PA STE,
,YOD DANG MED PA’I PHYOGS ‘JIG PA,

This is something that we can understand from the scriptures themselves; as the Journey to Langka puts it,

To the south, in the land of Patha,
There will come a glorious monk
Of exceeding renown.

He will go by the name of Naga,
And he will destroy the positions
Of “they exist” and “don’t exist.”


	[941]
,NGA YI THEG PA ‘JIG RTEN DU,
,BLA MED THEG CHEN RAB BSHAD NAS,
,RAB TU DGA’ BA’I SA BSGRUBS TE,
,BDE BA CAN DU DE ‘GRO’O,

He will take my way
And explain it in the world
As the greater way,
The unsurpassed.

He will attain the level
Of Perfect Happiness,
And pass to the Heaven of Bliss.


[942]
ZHES NGES DON GYI THEG PA YOD MED KYI MTHA’ GNYIS DANG BRAL BA KLU SGRUB KYIS ‘GREL PAR GSUNGS SO,,

This is a reference to the fact that Nagarjuna would explicate the way of the scriptures which relate what the Buddha most intended to teach—a tradition free of the two extremes of “all things exist” & “nothing exists.”


[943]
‘DI NI GSER ‘OD DAM PA NAS BSHAD PA, STON PA ZHAL BZHUGS DUS KYI LI TZA BYI GZHON NU ‘JIG RTEN THAMS CAD KYIS MTHONG NA DGA’ BA ZHES BYA BA DE NYID SKYE BA BZHES PA YIN TE,

He was also spoken of in the Sutra of Highest Golden Light: In the days when the Teacher was still in this world, he deigned to take birth as a youth of the Lichavi people, and was known as Sarvaloka Priyadarshana: “The One that the Whole World Loves to See.”


[944]
SPRIN CHEN LAS, GZHON NU ‘DI MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS NAS LO BZHI BRGYA LON PA NA, KLU ZHES BYA BA’I DGE SLONG DU GYUR NAS NGA’I BSTAN PA RGYAS PAR BYAS TE, MTHAR RAB TU DANG BA’I ‘OD CES BYA BA’I ZHING DU, [f. 75a] YE SHES ‘BYUNG GNAS ‘OD CES BYA BA’I RGYAL BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

As the Great Cloud puts it,

This young man, 400 years after my final nirvana, will become a monk by the name of “Naga.”  He will spread my teaching, and finally become the Victor known as “The Light of the Source of Wisdom,” in a Buddha paradise named “The Light of Clarity.”


[945]
DE’I PHYIR ‘DI LA NGES DON GYI LUNG PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR NGES PA YOD PAR GRUB BO,,

As such, we can say that this sage did ascertain, in a flawless way, what the Buddha most intended to teach.


[946]
‘JAM DPAL GYI RTZA BA’I RTOG PA LAS KYANG, ‘BYUNG BA’I DUS DAD {%DANG} MTSAN DE DANG ‘DRA LA, LO DRUG BRGYA BZHUGS PAR BSHAD DO,,

The root text on the practice of Gentle Voice mentions the same time frame for Arya Nagarjuna’s apprearance, and his name to be.  It also states that he would live for 600 years.


[947]
RNGA BO CHE’I MDO LAS LI TZA BYI GZHON NU ‘JIG RTEN THAMS CAD KYIS MTHONG NA DGA’ BA ‘DI, STON PA ‘DAS NAS LO BRGYAD CU PA LA BSTAN PA NYAMS PA’I TSE, STON PA’I MTSAN ‘CHANG BA’I DGE SLONG DU GYUR NAS BSTAN PA RGYAS PAR BYAS TE, LO BRGYA LON PA’I ‘OG TU ‘DAS NAS BDE BA CAN DU SKYE BAR GSUNGS SO,,

The Sutra of the Great Drum also speaks of a young man of the Lichavi people named “The One that the Whole World Loves to See,” and says that—eighty years after the passing of the Teacher, when his teachings have gone into decline—this youth will become a monk who holds the name of the Teacher, and will work to spread the word again.  It further says that he will live a hundred years and that after he passes away, he will be born in the Heaven of Bliss.


[948]
‘DI YANG SLOB DPON ‘DI’I LUNG BSTAN DU GNAS BRTAN BYANG BZANG DANG, JO BO CHEN PO BZHED DE LI TZA BYI MTHONG NA DGA’ BA KLU SGRUB DANG RGYUD GCIG TU BSHAD PA LA BRTAN {%BRTEN} PA’O,,

Our presentation here relies upon the position held by both the elder Bodhibhadra and by Lord Atisha, which says that the Lichavi youth named Sarvaloka Priyadarshana was the same mindstream as Nagarjuna.


[949]
RNGA BO CHE LAS DGE SLONG DE SA BDUN PA BAR BSHAD DO, ,DE LTAR BSHAD PA DANG SNGA MA RNAMS ‘GAL BAR SGRUB MI NUS TE, RGYAL CHEN ‘GA’ ZHIG LUNG KHA CIG LAS RGYUN ZHUGS SU BSHAD PA DANG, LUNG GZHAN DU SANGS RGYAS SU BSHAD PA LTA BU GSUNG RAB LA DU MA ZHIG SNANG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

In the Great Drum it is explained that this monk would be a bodhisattva at the seventh level.  And yet no one could say with certainty that this position contradicts the one expressed earlier.  Certain great kings for example are said in some scriptures to have been stream enterers, while other scriptures say they were Buddhas; we see many variants like this in the teachings of the Word.



Who is a worthy vessel for the profound

	[950]
	[VI.4]
Pṛthagjanatve’pi niśamya śūnyatāṃ
pramodam antar labhate muhurmuhuḥ,
Prasādajāsrāvilajāta locanas
tanūruhotphulla tanuś ca jāyate.

	[VI.5]
Yas tasya Saṃbuddha dhiyo’sti bījaṃ
tattvopadeśasya ca bhājanaṃ saḥ,
Ākhyeyam asmai paramārtha satyaṃ 
tad anvayās tasya guṇā bhavanti.
	
	[VI.4-5a]
,SO SO SKYE BO’I DUS NA’ANG STONG PA NYID THOS NAS,
,NANG DU RAB TU DGA’ BA YANG DANG YANG DU ‘BYUNG,
,RAB TU DGA’ BA LAS BYUNG MCHI MAS MIG BRLAN ZHING,
,LUS KYI BA SPU LDANG BAR ‘GYUR BA GANG YIN PA,
,DE LA RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS BLO YIS SA BON YOD,
,DE NYID NYE BAR BSTAN PA’I SNOD NI DE YIN TE,
,DE LA DAM PA’I DON GYI BDEN PA BSTAN PAR BYA,

There are certain individuals who—
Even as common beings—
Feel repeated sensations of overwhelming joy
When they hear of emptiness.

This joy brings tears to their eyes,
And they get goosebumps.

These kinds of people have the seeds
For the mind of a fully enlightened Buddha.

These people then are proper vessels
To whom you can teach emptiness;
These are the ones to whom you should teach
The reality which is ultimate.


[951]
GNYIS PA NI, NGES PA’I DON GYI BSTAN BCOS DE YANG SNGAR GOMS PAR RGYUD LA, STONG NYID RTOGS PA’I SA BON BZHAG PA RNAMS NYID LA BSTEN {%BSTAN} PAR BYA’I,

This brings us to the second part in our explanation of suchness for those who see the subtle form of dependent events—and that is an identification of the kind of person who is a worthy vessel for an explanation of the profound.  Now these commentaries which explain what the Buddha most intended to teach should be presented only to those who—through their previous efforts to become familiar with these ideas—have planted in their minds the necessary seeds to realize emptiness.


[952]
GZHAN DAG LA NI MA YIN TE, DE DAG GIS STONG NYID STON PA’I GZHUNG NYAN DU ZIN KYANG, STONG NYID LA LOG PAR [f. 75b] ZHUGS PA’I BSAM PA DANG LDAN PAS, DON MA YIN PA CHEN PO DANG LDAN PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

They should not though be taught to others—because even if these other kinds of people do hear something of the great books which describe emptiness, they can start to develop some wrong ideas about it.  And then something very opposed to the goal can happen to them.


[953]
DON MA YIN PA CHEN POR ‘GYUR TSUL NI, RES ‘GA’ NI MI MKHAS PAS STONG NYID SPANGS NAS, NGAN ‘GROR ‘GRO’O,,

What does it mean when we say that “something very opposed to the goal can happen to them”?  Some people, out of a lack of mastery, actually reject the idea of emptiness; and they pass to the realms of misery.


[954]
RES ‘GA’ NI RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA’I STONG PA’I DON NI, CHOS ‘DI RNAMS MED PA NYID DANG, YOD PA MA YIN NO SNYAM DU PHYIN CI LOG TU NGES PAR BZUNG STE,

Other people completely misinterpret what it means when we say that nothing exists “by nature”: they think then that all the things around us then are nothing at all; or that they cannot exist.


[955]
RGYU ‘BRAS KYI DNGOS PO THAMS CAD LA SKUR PA ‘DEBS PA’I LOG LTA DANG POR BSKYED NAS, DE NAS DE MI GTONG BAR GONG NAS GONG DU ‘PHEL BAR BYED DO,,

And once we have started getting this wrong idea in our minds—the idea where we actually discount all the workings of things, their cause & effect—then we suddenly find ourselves unable to let it go, and it gets worse & worse.


[956]
,STONG PA NYID LA LTA NYES NA,
,SHES RAB CHUNG RNAMS PHUNG BAR ‘GYUR,
,JI LTAR SBRUL LA BZUNG NYES DANG,
,RIG SNGAGS NYES PAR BSGRUBS PAR BZHIN,

If they make a mistake
In how they think of emptiness,
Then those with little wisdom
Are ruined.

It’s like the disaster that happens
When you grab a snake,

Or make an error
Reciting a magical spell.


[957]
,ZHES PA’I ‘GREL PA TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG, KUN RDZOB PA LA SKUR ‘DEBS KYI MTHAR MI LTUNG BA LA, GZUGS BRNYAN DANG ‘DRA BA’I LAS ‘BRAS LA GNOD PA MA BYAS PA DGOS PA DANG,

The other commentary, A Clarification of the Verses, says that—in order not to fall into the extreme view of discounting the workings of deceptive reality—we must be careful not to damage the idea of deeds & their consequences behaving like the reflection of something in a mirror.


[958]
DON DAM PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PA’I MTHAR MI LTUNG BA LA, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN MED PA KHO NA LA LAS ‘BRAS MTHONG BA DGOS PAR GSUNGS SHING, DE GNYIS LAS BZLOG PA NI RTAG CHAD KYI MTHAR LTUNG BAR BSHAD LA,

And to avoid falling into the extreme view of overrating ultimate reality, we must understand that the workings of deeds & their consequences can only be observed in the absence of things having any nature of their own.  Master Chandrakirti explains that the opposite of these two is to fall into the extreme positions of thinking that nothing changes, or that nothing exists at all.


[959]
‘DU BYED RNAMS YOD PA MA YIN PAR RTOG NA LOG PAR LTA BAR GSUNGS PAS, MED PA DANG, YOD PA MA YIN PA LA TSIG GI KHYAD PAR YOD KYANG, MED PA’I RNAM PA ‘CHAR BA LA YID ZHIB PAR GTAD KYANG KHYAD PAR CI YANG MED DO,,

It is stated that the idea that things which cause things are not even something which exists is a mistaken viewpoint, and that leads to another thought: There is a difference in the wording between saying something “doesn’t exist” and saying that it “is not something which does exist”; but in the end if you look carefully at how your mind pictures the idea of “it doesn’t exist,” there’s absolutely no difference between the two.


[960]
BZHI BRGYA PA’I,
,GCIG NI NGAN ‘GRO NYID ‘GRO LA,
,THA MAL MA YIN ZHI NYID [f. 76a] DU’O,,

The 400 Verses includes these lines:

One of them goes no further
Than the realms of misery;

But the one who is extraordinary
Goes nowhere else but peace.


[961]
ZHES PA’I ‘GREL PAR DAM PA MA YIN PA GANG ZHIG BDAG MED PA’I CHOS NYAN PA DE NI, SPANGS PA DANG PHYIN CI LOG TU RTOGS PAS NGAN ‘GRO KHO NAR ‘GRO LA, ZHES GNYIS KA NGAN ‘GROR ‘GRO BAR BSHAD DE, PHYIN CI LOG TU RTOGS PA NI STONG PA’I DON YOD PA MA YIN PA’I DON DU BZUNG BA’O,,

The commentary to the text states that those who are not pure; and who listen to the teaching that nothing is itself; and who either reject it outright, or understand it in a mistaken way, can go no further than to the realms of misery—which is to say, both of these types of people will fall to those realms.  And when the text speaks of “those who understand it in a mistaken way,” it’s referring to those who interpret the concept of emptiness to mean that there is nothing whatsoever which exists.


[962]
DES NA SHIN TU PHRA BA’I DON ‘BYED PA’I BLO’I MTHU MED BZHIN DU, YOD PAR MNGON PA’I NGA RGYAL CAN GYIS, RANG GI DBANG PO DANG MI ‘TSAMS PA’I ZAB DON GYI TSIG TZAM LA MOS PA LTAR SNANG SHUGS DRAG PAR BYED PA NI, DON MA YIN PA CHEN PO ‘DREN PAR BYED PAS GNAS ‘DI DAG LA GZAB PAR BYA’O,,

We see then people who lack the mental capacity to make these extremely fine distinctions; and yet hubris compels them to believe that they do possess it—and so they display a fierce but mistaken ambition towards nothing more than verbal descriptions of this most profound idea, in a way that is far beyond the faculties they possess.  This situation could very well lead them to some very unexpected and terrible results; this is something we have to be very careful to avoid.


[963]
YANG JI LTAR ‘DI LA STONG PA NYID BSTAN PAR ‘OS SO, ,GANG ZAG ‘DI LA STONG PA NYID BSTAN PAR MI BYA’O ZHES NGES PAR DKA’ BA ‘DI JI LTAR NGES PAR NUS SHE NA,

Now one might pose the following question:

It seems a difficult thing to make the determination that “This particular person is worthy of the teaching on emptiness,” or “This is someone to whom we should not yet teach emptiness.”  Just how do we make this decision?


[964]
DE NI PHYI ROL GYI MTSAN MA RNAMS KYIS NGES NUS PAR STON PA NI, SO SO SKYE BO LAS DANG PO PA’I DUS NA’ANG STONG PA NYID KYI GTAM PHYIN CI MA LOG PA THOS PA NA, DE THOS PA NAS NANG DU GTAM DE LA RAB TU DGA’ BA YANG DANG YANG DU ‘BYUNG BA DANG,

It is at this point that the text instructs us on how to make this determination, based upon outer indications.  That is, there are certain individuals who—even as common beings that are raw beginners—feel repeated sensations of overwhelming inner joy about the instruction when they hear an unmistaken presentation of emptiness.


[965]
RAB TU DGA’ BA DE LAS BYUNG BA’I MCHI MAS MIG BRLAN PA DANG, LUS KYI BA SPU LDANG BA SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA GANG YIN PA DE LA, RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS KYI BLO RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA YI YE SHES KYI SA BON STONG NYID RTOGS PA’I SA BON ZHES PA YOD LA,

This joy brings tears to their eyes, and they get goosebumps.  These kinds of people have what we call “seeds for perceiving emptiness”: seeds for the mind of a fully enlightened Buddha—for the wisdom beyond conceptualization.


[966]
DE KHO NA NYID SLOB DPON MKHAS PAS NYE BAR BSTAN PA’I SNOD NI GANG ZAG DE YIN TE, GANG ZAG DE LA ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA’I MTSAN NYID CAN GYI DAM PA’I [f. 76b] DON GYI BDEN PA BSTAN PAR BYA’O,,

And these people then are proper vessels to whom a master teacher can teach emptiness.  So these are the ones to whom you should teach the form of reality which is ultimate—which has all the qualities which we are about to describe.


[967]
‘DI NI STONG NYID KYI GTAM PHYIN CI MA LOG PA THOS PA DANG, DE MI GO BA MIN PA GNYIS TSOGS NAS LUS KYI MTSAN MA DE RNAMS SKYE BAR SNANG NA, RTAGS MI ‘KHRUL BA YIN GYI,

Two things then have to come together here: a person must hear an unerring presentation about emptiness, and they must not fail to understand what they hear.  If the two do coincide, and these bodily indications do then make their appearance, we can say that the signs are unmistaken.


[968]
DON MI GO BA DANG, GO YANG MTSAN MA DE RNAMS MI SKYE NA RE ZHIG ZAB MO’I SNOD DU NGES MI NUS KYANG, BLA MA DAM PA’I BSGO BA LAS MI ‘DA’ NA, STONG NYID RTOGS PA’I RIGS NUS MANG PO GSAR DU ‘JOG PA’I SNOD DU RUNG NGO,,

Now suppose the person does fail to understand the presentation; or that they understand it, but fail to exhibit the indications we’ve mentioned.  For the time being, then, we would be unable to determine that they are a suitable vessel for the profound.  If however this person received instructions from a holy lama and did not fail to follow those instructions, we could say they were a suitable vessel for planting many new realizations relating to the eventual perception of emptiness.



The good that comes from emptiness

	[969]
[VI.6]
Śīlaṃ samādāya sadaiva vartate
dadāti dānaṃ karuṇāṃ ca sevate,
Titikṣate tat kuśalaṃ ca bodhaye
praṇāmayatyeva jagad vimuktaye.

	[VI.7]
Saṃbodhisattveṣu karoti gauravam
udāra gambhīranaye vicakṣaṇaḥ,
Labheta bhūmiṃ muditāṃ janaḥ kramāt
tad arthinaiṣā padavī niśāmyatām.


	[VI.5b-7a]
,DE LA DE YI RJES SU ‘GRO BA’I YON TAN ‘BYUNG,
,RTAG TU TSUL KHRIMS YANG DAG BLANGS NAS
GNAS PAR ‘GYUR,
,SBYIN PA GTONG BAR ‘GYUR ZHING SNYING RJE
STEN PAR BYED,
,BZOD PA SGOM BYED DE YI DGE BA BYANG CHUB TU,
,’GRO BA DGROL BAR BYA PHYIR YONGS SU
BSNGO BYED CING,
,RDZOGS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS LA
GUS PAR BYED,

		And they will achieve good qualities
		Which follow upon this:

They forever continue to
Observe a pure code of ethics;

		They make efforts in the act of giving;
		They dedicate themselves to great compassion;
		And they adhere to the practice of patience.

		They take all these good deeds
		And dedicate them to reaching enlightenment,
		So that they can free all living beings.

		Those who have reached total enlightenment
		Pay high respect to these bodhisattvas.


[970]
GSUM PA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I NYAN PA PO DE LA NI STONG NYID BSTAN PA ‘BRAS BU MED PAR MI ‘GYUR TE,

Here next is the third part of our explanation of the suchness of dependent events; that is, a description of the good qualities that this person develops, once they have received this type of explanation.  Now it is not the case that teaching emptiness to the type of student we have described above would ever be fruitless.


[971]
DE CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, ‘DI LTAR NYAN PA PO DE LA STONG PA NYID DU ‘DZIN PA PHYIN CI LOG GIS BSKYED PA’I DON MA YIN PA DANG LDAN PAR MI ‘GYUR BA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI,

Why is that?  It is not only the case that a student of this type will never be someone to whom, because they have begun to consider emptiness in a mistaken way, that thing very opposed to the goal can happen.


[972]
STONG NYID KYI LTA BA NYAN PA DE’I RJES SU ‘GRO BA STE ‘BRAS BU’I YON TAN RNAMS KYANG ‘BYUNG NGO,,

Rather, they will as well achieve certain good qualities which follow upon—which are the result of—this listening to the view that things are empty.


[973]
‘BYUNG TSUL JI LTAR ZHE NA, SNOD LDAN DE STONG NYID KYI LTA BA NYAN PA LA GTER RNYED PA DANG ‘DRA BAR SEMS SHING, LTA BA DE SKYE BA GZHAN DU YANG MI NYAMS PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, RTAG TU TSUL KHRIMS YANG DAG PAR BLANGS NAS GNAS PAR ‘GYUR TE,

How does this happen?  A person who is a suitable vessel for this teaching looks upon the opportunity to hear about the view that things are empty in the way that another person might feel about uncovering a mine of gold.  And because they make efforts to assure that they never lose this view of things—even in lifetimes beyond this one—they forever continue to observe a pure code of ethics.


[974]
DE YANG BDAG TSUL KHRIMS ‘CHAL BA’I RKYEN GYIS NGAN ‘GROR LHUNG NA, STONG NYID KYI LTA BA RGYUN CHAD PA RANG ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NAS TSUL KHRIMS BLANGS TE MI NYAMS PAR SRUNG BA YIN NO,,

People like this commit to a code of ethical behavior and are then careful always to honor it, for they think to themselves: “If because I failed in my ethical code I were to fall into the realms of misery, my insight into emptiness would itself be discontinued.”


[975]
TSUL KHRIMS ‘CHAL PA LA NI SNGON DU TSUL KHRIMS BLANGS PA MI DGOS KYI, TSUL KHRIMS KYI MI MTHUN PHYOGS RANG BZHIN GYI KHA NA MA THO BA YANG TSUL ‘CHAL LO,,

And by the way, it is not necessarily the case that—for a person to fail in their ethical code—they must prior to that have committed to such a code.  The enemies of an ethical life represented by actions which are by nature misdeeds also qualify as failures in ones code of ethics.


[976]
BDAG TSUL KHRIMS BSRUNGS PAS BDE [f. 77a] ‘GROR SKYES KYANG, DBUL POR GYUR NAS BZA’ BTUNG DANG SMAN DANG GOS LA SOGS PA’I ‘TSO BA’I YO BYAD KYIS PHONGS NA, DE ‘TSOL BA LHUR LEN NAS STONG NYID KYI LTA BA NYAN PA DANG, DE’I DON SGOM PA SOGS RGYUN CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NAS,

And so one thinks to oneself,

Now if I keep to my code of ethics, I will be able to take a birth into one of the happier realms; but suppose as I do, I am born as someone who is poor: as a person who lacks the various necessities of life—things such as food and drink; or medicine and clothing.  In that case, I will need to spend all of my time & effort seeking these things; and then my attempts to seek teachings on the view that things are empty, and to engage in practices such as meditating upon this view, will be interrupted.


[977]
SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR YAR MAR GYI ZHING LA SBYIN PA GTONG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As a result, then, we will (as we explained before) make efforts in the act of giving, to beings who are both higher and lower than us.


[978]
STONG NYID KYI LTA BA SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SNYING RJE CHEN POS ZIN PA NI SANGS RGYAS NYID ‘DREN PAR BYED KYI, GZHAN DU NI MA YIN NO SNYAM NAS RTZA BA SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA GOMS PA BSTEN PAR BYED DO,,

We will as well dedicate ourselves to that most fundamental of practices—great compassion; thinking to ourselves, “What brings a person to Buddhahood is the view that things are empty, imbued with that attitude of great compassion which has previously been presented—nothing else can do it.”


[978]
KHO {%KHRO} BAS NI NGAN SONG DU ‘GRO BA DANG DGE BA ‘JOMS LA, MDOG SHIN TU MI SDUG PA ‘THOB PAR BYED PAS DE’I RKYEN GYIS ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS MNYES PAR MI ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NAS BZOD PA SGOM PAR BYED DO,,

We will as well adhere to the practice of patience, thinking to ourselves, “Thoughts of anger can drag me to the lower realms, and destroy all of my good seeds; these things that also mar my appearance so drastically will never please the realized beings of the world.”


[979]
THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAR YANG YANG MA BSNGOS PA’I TSUL KHRIMS LA SOGS PA NI, SANGS RGYAS THOB PA’I RGYU DANG, LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD LA SOGS PA’I ‘BRAS BU DPAG TU MED PA RGYUN MA CHAD PAR ‘BYUNG BAR MI ‘GYUR BAS, TSUL KHRIMS LA SOGS PA DE YI DGE BA YANG ‘GRO BA ‘KHOR BA LAS SGROL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU BYANG CHUB TU YONGS SU SNGO BAR BYED DO,,

So too we must take all these good deeds we have done—things like taking care to observe an ethical way of life—and dedicate them to reaching enlightenment, so that we can free all living beings from the cycle of pain.  For practices such as an ethical life, when we fail to dedicate them again & again to reaching a knowledge of all things, can never then serve as causes for attaining Buddhahood, nor produce—in an unbroken stream—an endless supply of the fruits of goodness: things like a human body, or the material necessities of life.


[980]
BYANG SEMS MA GTOGS PA NYAN RANG LA SOGS PA GZHAN DAG GIS RTEN ‘BREL ZAB MO BYANG SEMS BZHIN DU STON MI NUS PAR MTHONG NAS, RDZOGS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS LA SHIN TU GUS PAR BYED DO,,

Those who have reached total enlightenment pay high respect to these bodhisattvas, for they see that no one other than a bodhisattva (a reference to those who are not bodhisattvas—listeners, self-made Buddhas, & the like) has the capacity to teach the most profound form of dependent events in the same way that a bodhisattva does.


[981]
STONG NYID KYI LTA BA’I GO BA GNAD DU SONG BA’I THEG CHEN [f. 77b] PA LA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTA BU’I GO BA RNAM DAG RNAMS SKYES NAS RGYA CHE BA’I PHYOGS RNAMS SGRUB PA LA SHIN TU GUS PAR ‘GYUR LA, DE NI SHIN TU BSNGAGS PA’I GNAS YIN TE,

Consider then a follower of the greater way whose understanding of the view that all things are empty strikes truly deep.  Once they have reached a completely correct understanding in the way we’ve described it above, they develop a high regard for the widespread side of the teachings. Reaching this point is something worthy of high praise.


[982]
BYANG CHUB SEMS ‘GREL LAS,
,CHOS RNAMS STONG PA ‘DI SHES NAS,
,LAS DANG ‘BRAS BU STEN PA GANG,
,NGO MTSAR BAS KYANG ‘DI NGO MTSAR,
,RMAD BYUNG BAS KYANG ‘DI RMAD BYUNG,
ZHES GSUNGS TE,

As the Commentary on the Wish for Enlightenment puts it,

When a person comes to realize
That everything is empty

And then devotes themselves
To the teachings of deeds and results,

It is something beyond amazing,
Something more wondrous than wonder.


[983]
SNOD MI RUNG GNYIS PO MI MOS NAS SPONG BA DANG, ,MOS PA LTAR SNANG YOD KYANG RIGS PAS RGYU ‘BRAS THAMS CAD BKAG PAR GO BA’I SKYON GNYIS SPANGS LA, RANG BZHIN MED PA’I STONG NYID KYI LTA BA NYID LA BRTEN NAS BYA BYED THAMS CAD CHES ‘THAD PAR RTOGS PA CIG LA ‘ONG BA YIN NO,,

A person like this has rid themselves of both the problems that make one an unworthy vessel for this teaching: rejecting it out of a lack of interest; and taking a faulty interest in it, in a way where you understand it to mean that the logic denies all cause & effect.  They are someone who—because they have availed themselves of the viewpoint which says that all things are empty of any nature of their own—comes to the realization that all the workings of the world are perfectly logical.


[984]
DE LTA MA YIN NA LTA BA RNYED PA’I LUGS SU BYAS PA NA, TSUL KHRIMS LA SOGS PA’I LAS ‘BRAS KYI RNAM GZHAG THAMS CAD, RI BONG GI RVA’I GNYER MA BGRANG PA BZHIN DU SONG NAS,

Otherwise you can start to believe that the entire structure of the teachings on deeds and their consequences—the teachings on subjects such as how to lead an ethical way of life—are all just a useless exercise, like counting up the bumps on a rabbit’s horn; and think that you have finally discovered the true meaning of a correct view of reality.


[985]
DE ‘DRA BA NI NGES DON MA GO BA RNAMS KYI PHYIR YIN GYI, NGES DON GO BA LA MI DGOS TE, DE DAG THAMS CAD RTOG PAS BYED LA RTOG PA THAMS CAD BDEN ZHEN GYI MTSAN ‘DZIN YIN PA’I PHYIR RO SNYAM DU ‘DZIN ZHING, RGYA NAG GI HVA SHANG LTAR DGE BA THAMS CAD ‘JOMS LA,

When something like this happens, it’s all because a person has failed to grasp what the Buddha most intended to say.  And they in turn will think to themselves that there’s no need to understand what he most intended to say, since (according to them) all this is just the product of our conceptual state of mind, and all such states of mind are actually grasping to signs: believing that things are real.  Thus then they will, like the Chinese monk Hashang, destroy all their good deeds.


[986]
KHA CIG ‘KHRUL NGOR RE ZHIG LA BLANG DOR BYED ZER YANG, RTOG PA LA BDEN ‘DZIN YIN MIN GNYIS BYED NA NI, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA’I RIGS PAS YUL THAMS CAD ‘GOG PA CAL COL YIN LA,

Some people have come up with this idea of “the provisional observation of proper behavior in the face of misapprehending the true nature of reality,” but dividing conceptual thought into cases where we are holding onto things as real and cases where we are not is, in the end, just that same old talk which says that—since the proofs of emptiness deny that anything can exist naturally—then no object in the universe even exists.


[987]
GNYIS SU MI BYED NA NI LTA BA DANG SPYOD PHYOGS KYI RTOG PA GNYIS GCIG GIS GCIG LA GNOD PA SKYEL [f. 78a] BA TSA GRANG LTAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR DANG,

Because, they would say, if you don’t divide conceptual thought into the two, then conceptual thoughts involved in the view that all things are empty and in the widespread intention to save all beings would themselves draw each other into question, working against each other like hot & cold.


[988]
GZHAG SA’I ‘KHRUL NGO DANG, ‘JOG MKHAN DANG DER ‘JOG RGYU RNAMS KYANG ‘JOG SA MED PA LA DE SKAD SMRA BA NI MUN SPRUL YIN PAS, SNGAR GYI GZHUNG DE RNAMS KYI PHYOGS SNGA MA NYID ‘DZIN PA’O,,

Saying that we can’t talk about the state of mind that’s making the mistake, and the person who’s talking about it, and the thing they’re talking about, is all just blind ignorance.    You should stick to the starting position, of the classics we’ve just listed—and forget everything else.



Listen, and teach, well

	[989]
	[VI.7b]
,ZAB CING RGYA CHE’I TSUL LA MKHAS PA’I SKYE BOS NI,
,RIM GYIS RAB TU DGA’ BA’I SA NI ‘THOB ‘GYUR BAS,
,DE NI DON DU GNYER BAS LAM ‘DI MNYAN PAR GYIS,

An individual who is well versed
In both the profound & the widespread

Will, in time, attain the level
Of Perfect Happiness.

Lend then your ears to this path,
Those who aspire to reach it.
			


[990]
BZHI PA NI, DE LTAR GONG DU BSHAD PA LTAR GYI ZAB PA DANG, RGYA CHE BA’I TSUL LA MKHAS PA’I SKYE BOS NI, YUN RING POR BAR MED PAR ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I PHYOGS KYI DGE BA’I TSOGS RNAMS SO SKYE’I SAR, NGES PAR BSAGS NAS RIM GYIS RAB TU DGA’ BA’I SA NI THOB PAR ‘GYUR BAS,

Next is our fourth part from above: words urging people who are a worthy vessel to listen well to this explanation of the suchness of dependent events.  So we take an individual who is well versed in both the profound & the widespread aspects of the teachings, and who at the levels of one who is still only a normal person has most certainly accumulated—over a long period of time, and without interruption—a large quantity of good deeds, relating again to both the profound & widespread sides of the path.  A person like this will, in time, attain the bodhisattva level of Perfect Happiness.


[991]
SA RAB DGA’ DE NI DON DU GNYER BAS ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA’I ZAB MO’I LAM ‘DI MNYAN PAR GYIS SHIG CES NYAN PAR BSKUL PA’O,,

And so if you are a person who aspires to reaching this level, Perfect Happiness, then you are being urged to listen: “Lend your ears to the profound path which I will now explain.”


[992]
DE YANG BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID KYI GTAM LA GUS PAR ‘GYUR NA DE DE DANG MTHUN PA’I RKYEN NYE BAR BSGRUBS PA’I SGO NAS, JI LTAR STONG PA NYID LA DANG BA ‘PHEL BAR ‘GYUR BA DE LTAR BYA ZHING, SNYING RJE CHE BA DANG, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA LA BYAS PA GZO ZHING,

As the commentary to the The 400 Verses puts it,

Those who feel respect for discussions of the fact that things are empty of any nature of their own should accomplish the various causes that help bring about these discussions.  As your faith in emptiness grows, you should do this more & more, and also work to develop great compassion ever further.  You should in addition work to repay the kindness of the Victors—Those Who Have Gone That Way.


[993]
BDAG NYID KYI DAM PA’I CHOS KYI BAR CHAD KYI RGYU MTSAN G-YANG SA CHEN PO’I RGYU YONGS SU SPANG BAR ‘DOD PAS, YA NGA BA LA BRTEN PA DANG SBYIN PAR DKA’ BA YANG SBYIN PA DANG,

Intent on ridding yourselves of anything which would trigger a fall into the great abyss—anything which would act as an obstacle to your practice of the high teachings—you must undertake even the most daunting good deeds, and give even those things which are most difficult to give.


[994]
BSDU BA’I DNGOS PO BZHIS KYANG BSDU BA BYA STE, DAM PA’I CHOS ‘DI ‘BAD PA THAMS CAD KYIS SKYE BO DAM PA’I CHOS KYI SNOD DU GYUR PA LA NYE BAR BSTAN PAR BYA’O,

And then you should also gather disciples to you, by using the four ways of gathering; and with every effort give teachings to those high beings who are worthy vessels.


[995]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR CHOS ‘DI ‘BAD PA CHEN POS BSTAN DGOS PAR [f. 78b] GSUNGS TE, SNOD MIN GYI SKYON GNYIS DANG BRAL BA LA’O, ,MOS PA YOD PA’I JI LTA BA BZHIN MI GO BA LA YANG, RTEN ‘BREL GYI NGES PA LA MI GNOD PA’I THABS BYAS NAS BSHAD PAR BYA’O,,

What this is saying is that we should make special efforts in this particular teaching—and this is being addressed to people who are free of those two different problems that would prevent one from being a worthy vessel.  Master Aryadeva is also saying that he will make a presentation—to those who have a wish to learn but who have yet to understand the real nature of reality—in such a way that it will not disrupt their grasp of dependent events.


[996]
‘CHAD PA PO LEGS PAR SHES PAS NYAN PA PO SNANG {%SNOD} RUNG THA MA YAN CHAD LA ‘CHAD PA NI BSOD NAMS SHIN TU CHE STE,

When there is a person to give the explanation who really understands it, and they do deliver the explanation to even the very least of people who are a worthy vessel—or anyone more fit than that—then the good karma created is truly massive.


[997]
MDO KUN LAS BTUS PA LAS, CHOS ZAB MO LA MOS PAS BSOD NAMS THAMS CAD SDUD PA YIN TE, SANGS RGYAS SU MA GRUB KYI BAR DU ‘JIG RTEN PA DANG ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I PHUN SUM TSOGS PA THAMS CAD ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR TE,

As the Compendium of All the Sutras puts it,

A wish to learn that most profound teaching helps us gather in every good karma there is.  It helps us achieve every excellent thing of the world and beyond the world, all the way up until we become an Enlightened Being.


[998]
KHYE’U RIN PO CHES BYIN PA’I MDO LAS BYUNG BA, ‘JAM DPAL BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ THABS LA MKHAS PA DANG BRAL BAS, BSKAL PA BRGYA STONG DU PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA DRUG LA SPYAD PA BAS, GANG GIS CHOS KYI RNAM GRANGS ‘DI THE TSOM DANG BCAS PAS NYAN PA ‘DI,

	The Sutra of the Youth named “Gift of the Precious” says,

Suppose, o Manjushri, that there is a bodhisattva who lacks the capacity to utilize this unexpected means in their practice, and they undertake the six perfections for a hundred eons, or even a thousand.  And suppose there is another person who listens to this particular presentation of the teaching, even as they entertain doubts about it.


[999]
BSOD NAMS DE BAS CHES MANG DU SKYED NA GANG THE TSOM MED PAR NYAN PA LTA CI SMOS,

This second person creates far more good karma than the first; and if this is the case, then what need is there to mention what happens with a person who listens to this teaching without harboring any doubts about it?


[1000]
GANG YI GER BRIS NAS LUNG ‘BOGS PA DANG ‘CHANG BA DANG, GZHAN DAG LA YANG RGYA CHER RAB TU STON PA LTA CI SMOS, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And now suppose a person copies out this teaching in writing; or grants someone an oral transmission of it; or commits it to memory; or teaches it well, and in detail, to others—what need mention the good karma that they accumulate?


[1001]
RDO RJE GCOD PA LAS KYANG, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS BKA’ STZAL TE, RAB ‘BYOR ‘DI JI SNYAM DU SEMS, GANG+G’A’I KLUNG GI BYE MA SNYED GANG JI SNYED PA GANG+G’A’I KLUNG YANG DE SNYED DU GYUR NA, GANG DE DAG GI BYE MAR GYUR PA DE MANG BA YIN NAM,

	In The Diamond Cutter we see as well—
		
		And again did the Conqueror speak:

O Subhuti, what do you think?  Suppose you counted every drop of water in the Ganges River, and then had exactly that many Ganges Rivers.  Would the number of drops in this many Ganges Rivers be very many?



[1002]
RAB ‘BYOR GYIS GSOL PA, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS GANG+G’A’I BYE MA SNYED DU GYUR PA DE DAG NYID KYANG MANG BA LAGS NA, DE DAG GI BYE MAR GYUR [f. 79a] PA LTA SMOS KYANG CI ‘TSAL,

		And Subhuti respectfully replied,

O Conqueror, if the amount of drops in just this one Ganges River is so great, then what need mention the amount of drops in so very many Ganges Rivers?


[1003]
BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS BKA’ STZAL PA, RAB ‘BYOR KHYOD LA BSGO’O, ,KHYOD KYIS KHONG DU CHUD PAR BYA’O, ,GANG+G’A’I KLUNG DE DAG GI BYE MA JI SNYED PA DE SNYED KYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS, SKYES PA’AM BUD MED LA LAS RIN PO CHE SNA BDUN GYIS RAB TU BKANG STE, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA LA SBYIN PA BYIN NA, SKYES PA’AM BUD MED DE GZHI DE LAS BSOD NAMS MANG DU SKYED DAM,

		Then the Conqueror said,

O Subhuti, try to imagine it.  Try to comprehend it.  Think now of a mass of planets equal in number to the number of drops in all these Ganges Rivers.  And then imagine that some son or daughter of noble family has come and covered all of them with the seven kinds of precious substances, and then gone and made a gift of these planets to the One Gone Thus, to the Destroyer of the Foe, to the Totally Enlightened One, the Buddha.

What do you think, Subhuti?  Would they create much merit from such a deed?


[1004]
RAB ‘BYOR GYIS GSOL PA, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS MANG LAGS SO, ,BDE BAR GSHEGS PA MANG LAGS SO,,

		Subhuti respectfully replied,

O Conqueror, many would it be.  O You who have Gone to Bliss, it would be many.  This son or daughter of noble family would indeed create much merit from such a deed.


[1005]
BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS BKA’ STZAL PA, GANG ZHIG CHOS KYI RNAM GRANGS ‘DI LAS THA NA TSIG BZHI’I TSIGS SU BCAD PA TZAM BZUNG STE, GZHAN DAG LA YANG BSTAN NA DE BAS BSOD NAMS CHES MANG DU SKYED DO, ZHES GSUNGS SO ZHES DANG,

		And the Conqueror said,

…And now suppose that someone else held but a single verse of four lines from this particular presentation of the Dharma, and explained it to others, and taught it correctly.  This second person would create much more merit from their action …


[1006]
DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I MDZOD KYI MDO LAS MI DGE BCU CHEN PO RNAMS BGRANGS NAS, DE DAG DANG LDAN PAS BDAG MED PA’I CHOS LA ‘JUG CING, CHOS THAMS CAD GDOD MA NAS DAG PAR DAD PA DANG MOS PA’I SEMS CAN DE NGAN SONG DU MI ‘GRO’O ZHES GSUNGS PA DANG,

The Sutra of the Treasure of Those Gone That Way also has a section where first it lists the most serious forms of the ten bad deeds, and then describes a person who has committed them, but who has entered the teaching which says that nothing is itself—who believes in and is attracted by the idea that every object in the universe is pure from the beginning.  Such a person, it says, will not fall to the realms of misery.


[1007]
BDUD ‘DUL BA’I LE’U LAS, DGE SLONG GANG GIS CHOS THAMS CAD SHIN TU DUL BAR SHES SHING, NYES PA RNAMS KYI THOG MA’I MTHA’ YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS DBEN PAR SHES TE, NYES PA BYUNG BA’I ‘GYOD PA SEL ZHING BRTAN POR MI BYED PAS MTSAMS MED PA YANG GNON NA, CHO GA DANG TSUL KHRIMS LA LOG PAR ZHUGS PA PHRAN TSEGS LTA CI SMOS, ZHES GSUNGS [f. 79b] PA DANG,

The Section on Subduing the Demons further states,

O monks, suppose someone understands that all the things in the universe have their own ultimate kind of self-control; suppose they understand that the ultimate beginning of all the mistakes we can make is itself completely devoid of any nature of its own.  This then clears away any regret they might entertain about mistakes they have made before, and steals away the strength of these errors.  If such an understanding can thus overcome even one of the immediate misdeeds, what need mention what it can do to minor mistakes in performing rituals, or in maintaining ones morality?


[1008]
MA SKYES DGRA’I MDO LAS, MTSAMS MED BYED PAS DAM PA’I CHOS ‘DI THOS NAS ‘JUG CING MOS NA, DE’I LAS DE LAS KYI SGRIB PA YIN ZHES NGA MI SMRA’O,,

And the Sutra of Ajata Shatru says as well,

Suppose a person has committed one of the immediate misdeeds, but then begins to learn these high teachings, and believe in them.  I do not say that the karma of such a person could ever be a karmic obstacle.
 

[1009]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR TE ‘CHAD NYAN BYED PA DANG, DE MIN PA’I SKABS SU YANG DON ZAB MO LA MOS PA DANG SEMS PA’I PHAN YON NO,,

What this is describing is the great benefit of both teaching and studying this profound truth, as well as believing in it, and contemplating it, during other periods of the day.


[1010]
BSHAD PA’I PHAN YON LEGS PAR ‘THOB PA LA GNYIS DGOS TE, RNYED BKUR DANG GRAGS PA SOGS LA MI LTA BA’I KUN SLONG DAG PA ZHIG DANG, BSHAD RGYU’I CHOS DE’I DON LOG PAR MA BZUNG BAR PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR BSHAD PA CIG DGOS TE,

In order to truly get the described benefit from explaining this truth to others, there are two requisites which must be fulfilled.  First, we must do so with a pure motivation; that is, without hoping for things like the respect of others, or fame.  Secondly, we must explain the particular teaching correctly—without mistaking any part of its meaning.


[1011]
SKYON GNYIS KA’AM GANG RUNG RE DANG LDAN PAS BSHAD NA, BSOD NAMS MANG PO’I BAR CHAD BYED PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR TE, SLOB DPON DBYIG GNYEN GYIS, DE’I PHYIR GANG DAG CHOS LOG PAR ‘CHAD PAR BYED PA DANG, SEMS NYON MONGS PA CAN RNYED PA DANG BKUR STI DANG GRAGS PA ‘DOD PAS ‘CHAD PA DE DAG NI, BDAG NYID KYI BSOD NAMS CHEN PO NYAMS PAR BYED PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA NI ‘DIR YANG ‘DRA’O,,

If we do give our explanations with these two negative motivations—or even with either one of them alone—then it will, as has been stated, act as an obstacle to a large amount of good karma.  For the statement by Master Vasubandhu applies in this case as well:

As such, suppose a person gives a mistaken explanation of the teaching; or makes their explanation out of some kind of negative emotions: motivated by a desire for gain, or the honor of others, or for fame.  This act will then cause the degeneration of a large amount of their own good karma.
 

[1012]
NYAN PA PO LA YANG NYAN PA’I KUN SLONG DAG PA DANG, DON LOG PAR MA BZUNG BA GAL CHE BAS, GNYIS KAS KYANG ‘CHAD NYAN GYI DUS SU MTSAN NYID MA MTHA’ RE DANG LDAN PAR BYA’O,,

It is equally important that the person who listens to the explanation should have a pure motivation, and not misunderstand the material presented.  As such, both the teacher and the student should at the very least have either one or the other of these two qualifications, as they proceed in teaching & learning together.



How pure reality is presented in scripture 

[1013]
LNGA PA LA GSUM, YANG DAG PA’I DON LUNG GIS BSTAN PA’I TSUL, LUNG GI DON DE RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA, DES GRUB PA’I STONG NYID KYI RAB DBYE BSHAD PA’O,,

This brings us to the fifth part from above: a presentation on how we explain the true nature of dependent events.  We proceed in three steps: the way in which pure reality is presented in scripture; confirming the content of these scriptures through reasoning; and an explanation of the divisions of emptiness thus confirmed.


[1014]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, LUNG LAS GSUNGS PA’I TSUL DGOD PA DANG, DE KHO NA NYID SHES PA’I MI MTHUN [f. 80a] PHYOGS NGOS GZUNG BA’O,,

The first of these steps has two sections of its own: setting forth the different ways in which pure reality is presented in scripture; and identifying things that can work against an understanding of suchness.


[1015]
DANG PO NI, SA BCU PA LAS, SA LNGA PA BA DE SA DRUG PA LA ‘JUG PA NA, CHOS MNYAM PA NYID BCUS ‘JUG GO ,BCU GANG ZHE NA, ‘DI LTA STE CHOS THAMS CAD MTSAN MA MED PAR MNYAM PA NYID DANG,

Here is the first.  The Ten Levels of the Bodhisattvas says:

When a bodhisattva on the fifth level moves up to the sixth, she or he does it through the ten different ways in which things are equivalent.

What are the ten?  They begin with [1] the fact that all things are equivalent in having no indicators.


[1016]
CHOS THAMS CAD MTSAN NYID MED PAR MNYAM PA NYID DANG,

And [2] all things are equivalent in having no definition.


[1017]
DE BZHIN DU SKYE BA MED PA DANG, MA SKYES PA DANG, DBEN PA DANG, GDOD MA NAS RNAM PAR DAG PA DANG, SPROS PA MED PA DANG, BLANG BA MED PA DANG DOR BA MED PAR MNYAM PA NYID DANG,

[3] They are equivalent as well in not starting; [4] in not having started; [5] in being free; [6] in being pure from the beginning; [7] in being beyond all constructs; and [8] in there being nothing to take up and nothing to give up.


[1018]
CHOS THAMS CAD SGYU MA DANG, RMI LAM DANG, MIG YOR DANG, BRAG CHA DANG, CHU ZLA DANG, GZUGS BRNYAN DANG, SPRUL PA LTA BUR MNYAM PA NYID DANG,

[9] All things are equivalent too in being like an illusion; like a dream; a scarecrow; an echo; a moon reflected in still water; a reflection in a mirror; and an emanation.


[1019]
CHOS THAMS CAD DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS PO MED PA GNYIS SU MED PAR MNYAM PA NYID DE,

[10] All things are equivalent in neither being things, nor not being things.


[1020]
DE CHOS THAMS CAD KYI RANG BZHIN DE LTAR RAB TU RTOGS PA NA, RNO ZHING RJES SU MTHUN PA’I BZOD PAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SA DRUG PA MNGON DU GYUR PA RJES SU THOB STE, ZHES GSUNGS TE,

When the bodhisattva realizes the nature of all existing things in this way, they attain an incisive and accurate mastery which brings them to the attainment of the sixth level of a bodhisattva.


[1021]
DE BZHIN DU ZHES PA NI CHOS THAMS CAD CES PA BLANG DOR MED PA’I BAR LA SBYOR BA’O,,

The phrase “as well,” by the way, means that the “all things” is meant to be applied to everything up to there not being anything to take up or give up.


[1022]
DE GNYIS MNYAM NYID GCIG DANG, SGYU MA SOGS BDUN LTAR MNYAM PA RNAMS MNYAM PA NYID GCIG TU BYA ZHING, THA MA GNYIS KYANG GCIG TU BYA’O,,

Those two are meant to represent one equivalence combined; and the seven starting with the illusion are as well a single one.  Combine the final two into a single one as well.


[1023]
MNYAM PA NYID BCU’I NGOS ‘DZIN NI SA BCU PA’I MDO ‘GREL DANG, BYANG SA GNYIS KYANG MI MTHUN PAR SNANG LA, DE GNYIS DANG LUGS ‘DI STONG PA NYID ‘GREL TSUL MI MTHUN PAS ‘DIR GZHAN DU BSHAD DO,,

It appears that the way we describe these ten differs slightly between A Commentary to the Sutra on the Ten Levels and The Levels of the Bodhisattva.  Since the way in which these two works explain emptiness further differs from the system we are using here, I will cover them elsewhere.


[1024]
DE LA DANG PO NI [f. 80b] MTSAN MA MI ‘DRA BAR SNANG BA RNAMS ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG GI DON MED PAR CHOS KUN ‘DRA BA’O,,

As for the first of them, the way in which the indicators of things appear in a multitude of different ways is not something that can serve as an object of the direct emptiness-meditation of a realized being; and in this sense, all things are the same.


[1025]
GNYIS PA NI, CHOS KUN RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PAR MNYAM PA STE, DE GNYIS NI SPYIR BSTAN PA’O,,

As for the second, all existing things are equivalent in not existing in & of themselves.  These first two are meant as general cases.


[1026]
GZHAN BRGYAD NI SPYIR BSTAN PA’I DON DE NYID KHYAD PAR DU PHYE NAS STON PA STE, SKYE BA MED PA NI MA ‘ONGS PA DANG, MA SKYES PA NI DUS GZHAN GYI DBANG DU BYAS PA STE, DE YANG CHOS KUN LA MNYAM PA’AM ‘DRA BA NI GZHAN RNAMS LA’ANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

The other eight are particular examples divided out from these same general cases.  Things not starting on their own refers to things to come; whereas things not having started refers to things of the other times.  In this sense too all existing things are equivalent, or the same—and you can supply this part in all the other of the ten as well.


[1027]
DBEN PA NI SKYE ‘GYUR DANG SKYES PAS STONG BA STE, DE YANG MNYAM NYID GNYIS PA’I SKABS KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PAS DBEN PA’O,,

When we say that all things are “free,” what we mean is that they are empty of going to start or having started.  That is, they are free of the particular quality of existing in & of themselves—which puts them in the category of the second equivalence.


[1028]
DE LTA BU DE YANG ‘PHRAL DU LUNG RIGS KYIS BYAS PA MIN GYI, GDOD MA NAS RNAM PAR DAG PA DE LTAR DU GNAS PA NI DRUG PA’O,,

This condition of things, by the way, is not something that was created either by statements in scripture or by someone’s logic; rather, things have stayed like this—totally pure—from the beginning.  And thus we get the sixth form of equivalence.


[1029]
BDUN PA LA GNYIS SNANG GI SPROS PA MED PA NI DANG PO DANG SBYAR LA, SGRA DANG RNAM RTOG GIS SPRO BAR MI NUS PA LA NI GNYIS PA’I SKABS KYI KHYAD PAR SBYAR RO, ,BRGYAD PA LA YANG KHYAD PAR DE LTAR SBYAR RO,,

The seventh form, of being free of any construct where things appear in one way and exist in another, applies to the first form.  The fact that none of these things can exist through constructs put together with terms or concepts is in turn a particular case of the second form of equivalence.  We can particularize the eighth form in the same way.


[1030]
DGU PA NI SNGAR BSHAD PA’I DON DE RNAMS NGES PAR BYED PA’I DPE’I RNAM GRANGS MANG PO’O,,

The ninth form is where we use a variety of different metaphors to help people ascertain the meaning of the forms we’ve already described.


[1031]
BCU PA NI CHOS GANG LA YANG DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS POR MED PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR ‘DRA BA’O,,

The tenth form refers to the fact that all things in the universe are the same in neither being things, nor not being things, through any nature of their own.


[1032]
RNO BA NI SHES RAB MYUR BA’O, ,RJES SU MTHUN PA NI SA BRGYAD PA’I MI SKYE BA’I CHOS LA BZOD PA DANG RJES SU MTHUN PA STE, RJES SU MTHUN PA’I BZOD PA ‘DI LA SKABS STOBS KYIS MI ‘DRA BA MANG DU SNANG NGO,,

The word “incisive” is meant to indicate wisdom which is quick.  “Accurate” means that the mastery in this case matches the mastery of unborn things possessed by a bodhisattva at the eighth level.  When we speak of mastery being “accurate” though it can mean a lot of different things, depending upon the context.


[1033]
CHOS RNAMS [f. 81a] KYI DE KHO NA NYID STON PA LA LUNG DU MA ZHIG YOD KYANG, ‘DIR SA DRUG PA’I SHES RAB KYIS DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS TSUL ‘CHAD PA’I SKABS YIN PAS, SA DRUG PA LA MNYAM NYID BCUS ‘JUG PAR GSUNGS PA’I LUNG DRANGS SO,,

Now there are a great many scriptural references which describe the suchness of existing things.  The section we are treating at this point though is the one where we explain the manner in which the wisdom of a bodhisattva at the sixth level perceives suchness.  As such, we have quoted a scripture which describes how someone at the sixth level engages in emptiness, utilizing the ten forms of equivalence.



Things that work against
an understanding of suchness

[1034]
GNYIS PA NI, CHOS RNAMS BDEN MED DU GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA ‘DI LA, BDEN PAR GRUB TSUL DE JI ‘DRA ZHIG YIN PA DANG, BDEN PAR ‘DZIN TSUL LEGS PAR MA SHES NA, DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA NGES PAR ‘PHYUG STE,

Here is the second section from above: identifying things that can work against an understanding of suchness.  In the task of establishing just how it is that no object in the universe is real, we should understand clearly how it would be if something did exist in reality; and how it is that we grasp onto things as being real.  Otherwise, we will surely go astray in developing the view of suchness.


[1035]
SPYOD ‘JUG LAS, BRTAGS PA’I DNGOS LA MA REG PAR, ,DE YI DNGOS MED ‘DZIN MA YIN, ZHES BRTAGS PA’I DNGOS PO STE DGAG BYA’I SPYI LEGS PAR BLO LA MA SHAR NA, DGAG BYA DE MED PA LEGS PAR ‘DZIN MI NUS PAR GSUNGS PAS,

As the Guide to a Bodhisattva’s Way of Life puts it,

You will never grasp
How it cannot exist
Until you can touch
The thing we imagine.

What Master Shantideva is saying here is that—until such time as you can bring clearly to mind an image of what it is we deny (here called “the thing we imagine”)—then you will never be able to grasp how this object could never exist.


[1036]
MED RGYU’I BDEN GRUB DANG, GANG GIS STONG PA’I DGAG BYA’I RNAM PA BLO YUL DU JI LTA BA BZHIN MA SHAR NA, BDEN MED DANG STONG PA’I NGO BO LEGS PAR NGES PA MI SRID DO,,

It’s impossible to grasp, correctly, the essence of what it is not be real—or to be empty—if we cannot bring to mind, correctly, an image of “real existence” in the sense of the one which cannot exist; and an image of what it is we deny: the thing which emptiness is empty of.


[1037]
DE YANG GRUB MTHA’ SMRA BAS ‘PHRAL DU KUN BRTAGS PA’I BDEN GRUB DANG, BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS ZIN PA TZAM GYIS MI CHOG PA’I PHYIR,

In this endeavor though we cannot simply be satisfied with identifying what it is that a certain school of philosophy might, in one era or another, come up with as what “real existence” refers to; or what it means to grasp onto it.


[1038]
THOG MA MED PA NAS RJES SU ZHUGS PA, GRUB MTHAS BLO BSGYUR MA BSGYUR GNYIS GA LA YOD PA’I LHAN SKYES KYI BDEN ‘DZIN DANG, DES BZUNG BA’I BDEN GRUB LEGS PAR NGOS ZIN PA NI GNAD SHIN TU CHE STE,

Rather, it is crucial that we correctly identify the innate tendency—something possessed by both those whose minds have been influenced by a particular school of philosophy and those whose minds have not—which has been lying there for time with no beginning; as well as the “real existence” which this tendency grasps on to.


[1039]
DE NGOS MA ZIN PAR RIGS PAS DGAG BYA BKAG KYANG, THOG MA MED PA NAS ZHUGS PA’I BDEN ZHEN LA CI YANG MI GNOD PAS SKABS DON STOR BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Without identifying this tendency, we may be able to disprove the existence of the object we deny, using logic; but this will do no damage at all to the attachment to reality which has been inside of us since time with no beginning—and so the whole point of the exercise is lost.


[1040]
DE YANG [f. 81b] THOG MAR RANG GI RGYUD KYI BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS ZIN NAS, DE’I YUL SUN ‘BYIN PA LA RIGS PA RNAMS DNGOS DANG BRGYUD PAS ‘GRO LUGS SHES DGOS KYI, KHA PHYIR LTA ‘BA’ ZHIG GI DGAG SGRUB NI PHAN SHIN TU CHUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now the first thing we have to do is identify the tendency to hold things as real which exists within our own heart; and then we need to learn how the logic works—both directly & indirectly—to obliterate what this tendency thinks it sees.  If rather we turn our focus to disproving or proving something outside of ourselves, there will be very little benefit.



How we hold on to things as being real,
	according to the Independent group

[1041]
‘DI LA DBU MA THAL RANG GNYIS KA’I LUGS KYI NGOS ‘DZIN SHES NA KHYAD PAR LEGS PAR PHYED PAR ‘GYUR BAS, DE ‘CHAD PA LA GNYIS, DBU MA RANG RGYUD PA’I LUGS KYI BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS GZUNG PA DANG, DBU MA THAL ‘GYUR BA’I LUGS KYI BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS GZUNG BA’O,,

Once we know how both the Consequence and Independent sections of the Middle Way school make this identification, we can distinguish, perfectly, between the two.  We will explain these, then, in the two following steps: how the system of the Independent section of the Middle Way identifies the way in which we hold on to things as being real; and how the system of the Consequence section of the same school makes the same identification.


[1042]
DANG PO LA GSUM, BDEN GRUB DANG BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS GZUNG BA, ‘JIG RTEN PA LA LTOS PA’I BDEN RDZUN SGYU MA’I DPES BSTAN PA, DPE DE DON LA SBYAR NAS BSHAD PA’O,,

There are three parts to the first of these steps: their identification of “real existence,” and how we hold on to it; a presentation of the metaphor of a magician, to demonstrate from a worldly point of view the difference between what is real and what is false; and lastly how we relate this metaphor to actual things.



The Independent group on
real existence, and holding on to it

[1043]
DANG PO NI, RANG RGYUD PA’I GZHUNG KHUNGS THUB GZHAN LAS DGAG BYA NGOS ‘DZIN GSAL BAR MI ‘BYUNG LA, DBU MA SNANG BA LAS KUN RDZOB TU YOD TSUL BSHAD PA’I BZLOG PHYOGS KYI YOD PA NI DON DAM PAR RAM BDEN YOD DU SHES PAS DE LTAR BSHAD NA,

Here is the first.  We don’t see any very clear description of the thing we deny from other authoritative texts of the Independent group; but Light on the Middle Way does give an explanation of how things exist in a deceptive way—and if we reverse that, then we can arrive at how they describe things which exist in an ultimate way: as “real existence.”  So let’s start with that.


[1044]
DE NYID LAS, DNGOS PO YANG DAG PAR NGO BO NYID MED PA DAG LA YANG DE LAS LDOG PA’I RNAM PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PA’I ‘KHRUL PA’I BLO GANG YIN PA DE NI KUN RDZOB CES BYA STE, ‘DI’AM ‘DIS DE KHO NA NYID SGRIB PA LTA BUR BYED, ‘GEBS PA LTA BUR BYED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here is how The Light puts it:

When we say “deceptive,” what we’re referring to is the state of mind which focuses upon things which are, in fact, completely devoid of any essence of their own, and imputes them to have a nature which is the opposite.  And that—or we can say this—acts, in a way, to obscure suchness: in a way, it covers it.


[1045]
DE SKAD DU MDO LAS KYANG,
,DNGOS RNAMS SKYE BA KUN RDZOB TU,
,DAM PA’I DON DU RANG BZHIN MED,
,RANG BZHIN MED LA ‘KHRUL BA GANG,
,DE NI YANG DAG KUN RDZOB ‘DOD,
CES GSUNGS SO,,

	This is the same point made in sutra when it says,

Everything in the world
Starts in a way which is deceptive;

Things have no nature
Of starting in a way
Which is ultimate.

When we make a mistake
About the lack of a nature to things,

We say we’ve been deceived
About what is actually there.


[1046]
DE LAS BYUNG BA’I PHYIR DES [f. 82a] NYE BAR BSTAN PA MTHONG BA’I DNGOS PO BRDZUN PA THAMS CAD NI KUN RDZOB PA KHO NA YIN ZHES BYA’O,,

What this is saying is that—because they come from this place—all these objects that are presented to us, and which we then see, are lying to us: each & every one of them is nothing but a deception.


[1047]
DE YANG THOG MA MED PA’I ‘KHRUL PA’I BAG CHAGS YONGS SU SMIN PA’I DBANG GIS BYUNG LA, DES KYANG SROG CHAGS THAMS CAD LA YANG DAG PAR DNGOS PO’I BDAG NYID LTA BUR NYE BAR BSTAN PA MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR TE, DE’I PHYIR DE DAG GI BSAM PA’I DBANG GIS DNGOS PO BRDZUN PA’I NGO BO THAMS CAD NI, KUN RDZOB TU YOD PA KHO NA’O ZHES BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

All of this is coming from the ripening of seeds in our mind which, from time with no beginning, have forced us to see things in a mistaken way.  And because of these seeds, what is presented to the minds of every single living creature is a reality that looks as though it is composed of things that exist in & of themselves—and then we see it that way.  All these things whose very nature is to lie to us—which are nothing more than creations of our mind—are, the sutra is saying, nothing but things that exist in a deceptive way.


[1048]
DE NI ZHES PA YAN NI DON DAM PAR RANG BZHIN MED PA LA DON DAM PAR YOD PAR ‘KHRUL PA’I DON NO,,

The sentence starting with “When we say ‘deceptive’” is meant to indicate that we are making an error: we think that things which—ultimately—have no nature of their own do exist, ultimately.


[1049]
KUN RDZOB NAS PHYIR RO’I BAR NI YANG DAG KUN RDZOB CES PA’I DON TE, KUN RDZOB SGRIB BYED LA BYAS NAS YANG DAG PA LA SGRIB PAR BYED PA’O,,

The sentence that talks about acting to obscure things is meant to convey the idea of “deceiving about the actual”—meaning that deceptive reality is being referred to as an obscuration, and something which blocks us from perceiving actual reality.


[1050]
BDEN ‘DZIN DE LAS BYUNG BA’I PHYIR BDEN ‘DZIN DES BDEN PAR YOD PA LTAR NYE BAR BSTAN PA MTHONG BA NI RTOG PA YIN GYI DBANG SHES MIN TE, BDEN GNYIS KYI ‘GREL PAR DGAG BYA BDEN PA DBANG SHES LA MI SNANG BAR BSHAD PA ‘DIR YANG ‘DRA BA’I PHYIR RO,,

“Because they come from this place” means a place where we are grasping onto things as being real; and this tendency of holding on to things as real sees what is presented to us as though it existed in truth.  This “seeing” by the way is actually just having an idea, and is not referring to a sense consciousness.  And that’s because the case here is similar to that described in the Commentary to the Two Realities, where it says that the thing we deny—“real” existence—is not something which could ever appear to a sense consciousness.


[1051]
DE YANG NAS BYUNG BA’I BAR GYIS NI BDEN ‘DZIN DE LHAN SKYES SU STON TO, ,DES NA SROG CHAGS THAMS CAD LA ZHES SMOS SO,,

The words of the citation here from “All of this is coming from” up to “see things in a mistaken way” are meant to indicate that this particular tendency to see things as real is the inborn version.  And that’s why the lines go on to mention “every single living creature.”


[1052]
SROG CHAGS DE DAG GI BSAM PA NI RTOG PA KHO NA MIN GYI, RTOG MED KYI SHES PA LA YANG BYA STE, DE GNYIS KYI DBANG GIS YOD PAR BZHAG PA’I DON DAM PAR YOD PA MIN PA’I DNGOS PO BRDZUN PA RNAMS KUN RDZOB KHO NAR YOD PA NI, DNGOS RNAMS SKYE BA KUN RDZOB TU, ZHES PA’I DON TE, DE YANG BDEN ‘DZIN [f. 82b] GYI KUN RDZOB TU YOD PA’I DON MIN NO,,

Now it’s not the case that every thought that these living creatures ever have is discursive; rather, this description also applies to the thoughts they have which are not.  The things though that these two establish as existing and which lie to us—that is, things which are not such that they exist as the ultimate—can only exist deceptively.  This is the point of the lines quoted, where they say that “everything in the world starts in a way which is deceptive.”  This is not, by the way, to say that all these things are deceptive in the sense of being the tendency to take things as real.


[1053]
DE LTAR BYAS NA BLO LA SNANG BA’AM BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PAR DON GYI SDOD LUGS SU YOD PA NI, BDEN PA DANG DON DAM DANG YANG DAG PAR YOD PA DANG DER ‘DZIN PA NI BDEN ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES SO,,

As such, the idea that things could exist through some actual nature of their own—without being established through their appearing to the mind, or by the power of the mind—is what it means here to exist as “real,” or “ultimately,” or “purely.”  And to hold them to be this way is what we mean by “the inborn tendency to believe that things are real.”


[1054]
‘O NA SNANG BA LAS, DON DAM PAR SKYE BA MED DO ZHES BYA BA NI, ‘DI DAG YANG DAG PA’I SHES PAS SKYE BA MA GRUB BO ZHES BSHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I SHUGS KYIS DON DAM PAR YOD PA DANG, SKYE BA NI DE KHO NA NYID LA ‘JUG PA’I RIGS SHES KYIS SKYE BAR DANG YOD PAR GRUB PA LA BSHAD PA JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

At this point, one may pose the following question:

Let’s talk about a line in the Light, where it states: “When we say that there is ‘no such thing as something starting in an ultimate way,’ the point we are making is that these things cannot be established, by any pure state of mind, as starting.”  Isn’t this asserting, by implication, that there are some things which do exist in an ultimate way; and that the starting of a thing is something that can be established as starting—and as existing—by a logical state of mind engaged in the examination of suchness?


[1055]
BDEN TE DGAG BYA LA DON DAM GYI KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA’I DON DAM LA GNYIS SHES DGOS TE, THOS BSAM SGOM GSUM GYI RIGS SHES LA DON DAM DU BYAS NAS, DES SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR MA GRUB PA CIG DANG,

You are in fact correct; but you need to understand that there are two senses to the word “ultimate” when we apply it as a description of the thing that emptiness denies.  That is, when we speak of “ultimate” in the context of the state of mind which explores the nature of things during the three steps of learning, contemplating, and meditating, there is an “ultimate” here which—as we explained earlier—is established by this state of mind as not existing.


[1056]
BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PAR DON GYI SDOD LUGS SU YOD PA LA, DON DAM DU YOD PAR BZHAG PA GNYIS KYI DANG PO’I DON DAM DANG, DE’I NGOR GRUB PA YANG YOD LA, PHYI MA’I DON DAM DANG DER YOD PA GNYIS KA YANG MI SRID DO,,

And then we describe a second kind of “ultimate” existence, where a thing could exist in a natural way, without being established by the mind.  The quality of “ultimate” in the first case does exist, and does exist to this state of mind; whereas both the second “ultimate”—and anything which could exist this way to the mind—would be equally impossible.


[1057]
DES NA PHYI MA’I DON DAM DU YOD PA LA SNGA MA’I DON DAM DU YOD PAS KHYAB YANG, SNGA MA’I YOD ‘DZIN NI LHAN SKYES KYI BDEN ‘DZIN MIN LA, DE’I BDEN ‘DZIN LA NI PHYI MA’I YOD ‘DZIN DGOS SO,,

We can say thus that in the case of something existing ultimately in the latter sense, there would have to be something existing ultimately in the former sense; but that believing in the existence of the former is not the inborn tendency to hold that things are real—and for something to be that kind of tendency, it would have to be holding to the existence of the latter.


[1058]
‘DI MA PHYED PAR DGAG BYA’I TSAD ‘DZIN RIGS PAS DPYAD BZOD DANG, DPYAD BZOD KYI DNGOS PO LA ‘DZIN PA MANG DU BYUNG ZHING, DE LA BRTEN NAS DON DAM BDEN PA GZHI MA GRUB DANG, BDEN GRUB TU ‘DOD PA’I NOR PA MANG DU [f. 83a] BYUNG SNANG NGO,,

It would appear that there are many who have failed to make this distinction, and have put forth many different versions of how the state of mind that takes the measure of the thing that emptiness denies can itself stand up under reasoning; and just how we identify this process of standing up under reasoning, itself.  We have seen many mistaken viewpoints resulting from this failure, where it is said that ultimate reality itself cannot exist, or where it is held to exist in a real way.


[1059]
‘DI LEGS PAR SHES NA GSHIS LUGS LA DANG, DON DAM DU MED ZER BA DANG, YANG CHOS NYID YOD PAR ‘DOD CING DE NYID GSHIS LUGS DANG DON DAM YIN PAR SMRA BA MI ‘GAL BA’I GNAD RNAMS SHES PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If you come to understand these points well, then you can in turn comprehend essential points concerning how there is no contradiction when we say that nothing exists naturally, or ultimately; and yet still say that there does exist an essential nature of things, and that this is itself a natural existence, or ultimate nature, of these things.



The magic show

[1060]
GNYIS PA NI, BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA DANG MA BZHAG PA’I YOD PA JI LTAR YIN SHES PA LA, SGYU MA’I DPE’I STENG NAS SHES PAR BYED PA BSNGAGS PAS DE BSHAD NA,

Here then is our second point from above: a presentation of the metaphor of a magician, to demonstrate from a worldly point of view the difference between what is real and what is false.  One may begin by asking: “What do you mean when you say that something is, or isn’t, ‘established by the mind’?”  A method where we learn this point through the metaphor of a magic show is highly recommended; and so we will present it here.


[1061]
SGYU MA MKHAN GYIS RDE SHING SOGS RTA GLANG DU SPRUL PA NA, SGYU MA MKHAN DANG MIG BSLAD PA’I LTAD MO BA DANG, MIG MA BSLAD PA GSUM GYI

When a magician takes a small token or something of the like, and makes it appear as an elephant or a horse, there are three different types of people involved: the magician themselves; members of the audience who are under the magician’s spell; and others who are not.


[1062]
DANG PO LA, RTA GLANG DU SNANG BA TZAM YOD KYI DER ZHEN PA MED LA, GNYIS PA LA, DER SNANG DANG DER ZHEN GNYIS KA YOD, GSUM PA LA, RTA GLANG GI SNANG ZHEN GNYIS KA MED DO,,

The horse or elephant does appear to the first, but nothing more: they don’t believe it is real.  The animal appears to the second as well, and they also believe it’s real.  The creature does not appear to the third, nor do they believe it is real.


[1063]
SPRUL GZHI RTA GLANG DU SNANG BA NA, DPER NA THAG PA LA SPRUL {%SBRUL} DU ‘KHRUL PA’I TSE SHES PA DE’I NGOR THAG PA SBRUL YIN GYI, SPYIR SBRUL MIN ZHES ZER BA BZHIN DU,

Let’s consider what’s happening when the object the magician is using appears as though it were a horse, or elephant.  We can think of a parallel case, where a person has mistaken a piece of rope for a snake.  We can say that—to their perceptions—the rope is a snake; but that, generally speaking, the rope is not a snake.


[1064]
SHES PA ‘KHRUL NGO TZAM DU RTA GLANG DU SNANG BA YIN GYI, SPYIR SPRUL GZHI RTA GLANG DU MI SNANG ZHES BYAR MI RUNG GI

The situation here is similar.  The object is appearing—only to a mistaken state of mind—as though it were a horse or elephant.  It would be inappropriate though to say that, generally speaking, the token that the magician is using in the trick is not appearing as horse or elephant.


[1065]
,KHYAD PAR DE LTAR MA SBYAR YANG SPRUL GZHI RTA GLANG DU SNANG BAR KHAS BLANG DGOS TE, DE LTA MA YIN NA SNANG BA LA ‘KHRUL BA MI SRID PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Even if we aren’t qualifying our statement as we just did, we still have to accept that the token the magician is using is appearing as the horse or elephant; if that weren’t the case, then it would be impossible for the person to be mistaken about what is appearing to them.


[1066]
DES NA SPRUL GZHI RTA GLANG DU SNANG BAR ‘JOG NUS PA DE, ,SGYU MA MKHAN LTAR NA BLO ‘KHRUL PA LA DE LTAR SNANG BA’I DBANG GIS ‘JOG GI ,DE LTAR MIN PAR SPRUL GZHI RANG GI SDOD LUGS KYI DBANG GIS ‘JOG PA MIN NO,,

Thus can we establish that the token is appearing as the elephant; and from the magician’s point of view, the appearance of the object in this way is established with regard to a mistaken state of mind.  Suppose it were not this way: then the appearance of the token as an elephant would have to be established through some kind of natural existence of its own—but that’s not how it is.


[1067]
LTAD MO BA LA NI RTA GLANG DU SNANG BA DE [f. 83b] NANG GI BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PAR MI ‘CHAR GYI, GZHI GANG DU SNANG BA DER RTA GLANG MTSAN NYID PA CIG YUL GYI GO SA MNAN NAS BSDAD PAR ‘DZIN NO,,

It doesn’t seem to the spectator in the audience that the appearance of the horse or elephant is established through some inner state of mind; what they hold is that a genuine horse or elephant is there, occupying the space where the token that the magician is using is giving off its appearances.


[1068]
DE NI DPE’I STENG NAS BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA DANG MA BZHAG PAR ‘DZIN PA’I TSUL TE, GZHI DER SNANG BA DE SHAR BA NA SNANG BA LTAR GYI SDOD LUGS SU ‘GRO BA DANG MI ‘GRO BA GNYIS YOD DO,,

By using this metaphor, we can understand how we take things either to be established by the mind, or not to be established by it.  Here there are two possibilities: one where the object which is giving off its appearances actually does exist as it appears to; and another where it doesn’t.


[1069]
DE LEGS PAR GO NA TSAD MA’I DBANG GIS GZHAL BYA ‘JOG PA LA, TSAD MA YANG BLO YIN PAS DES GZHAL BYA ‘JOG PA YANG BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PAR ‘GYUR BAS,

If we understand this process well, we can see that—in a world where existent objects are established by force of accurate perception—we can say then that the way existent objects are established is that they are established by the mind; for after all, an accurate perception is a state of mind.


[1070]
DNGOS POR SMRA BA RNAMS KYI LUGS KYIS KYANG BDEN GRUB KHEGS PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM DU, PHYOGS DE GNYIS ‘DRES PA PHYED PAR ‘GYUR TE, TSAD MA’I DBANG GIS GZHAL BYA ‘JOG PA NI GZHAL BYA GNYIS KYI SDOD LUGS TSAD MAS RTOGS PA’I DON YIN PAS, DE DANG SNGA MA GNYIS GTAN MI ‘DRA BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now you might then think to yourself that the Functionalist system also denies that things could exist really; but you need to look at these two positions that you’ve blended together and separate them back out from each other.  When we say that existent objects are established by force of accurate perception, what we mean is that the nature of the two types of existents is something perceived by accurate perception.  As such, the case here and the case before are completely dissimilar.


[1071]
DE LTAR SGYU MA’I SNANG BA NI RNAL ‘BYOR SPYOD PA’I DBU MA PA LTAR NA RANG RIG MNGON SUM DANG, PHYI ROL KHAS LEN PA’I RANG RGYUD PA LTAR NA SA PHYOGS SAM BAR SNANG LTA BU’I GZHI ‘DZIN PA’I DBANG PO’I MNGON SUM GYIS ‘GRUB LA,

This sort of illusory appearance is established—according to the followers of the middle way who tend towards the Practitioner system—by apperception which is perceiving its object directly.  According to the followers of the Independent group who do accept the existence of outer objects, this appearance is established by a direct sense perception which is holding to an object such as a certain location, or a point in space.


[1072]
SNANG BA LTAR DU MED PA NI DE LTAR DU YOD NA MIG MA BSLAD PAS MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR BA LAS, DES MA MTHONG BA’I PHYIR ZHES SOGS KYI RTAGS KYIS KHEGS PA NA DER SNANG DANG DES STONG GNYIS TSOGS PA GRUB PA NA,

As for the fact that the thing is not what it appears to be, we can say things like: “If it actually were the way it seems to be, then it would have to be seen by any eyes which were not otherwise infected; but the fact is that it’s not.”  If we manage to use reasons like this to deny the thing, then we establish in a single swoop both that it was appearing a certain way, and that it was empty of actually existing the way it appeared.


[1073]
GRUB MTHAR MA ZHUGS PA’I THA SNYAD PA’I BLO RANG DGA’ BA LA LTOS PA’I BRDZUN PAR ‘GRUB PAS, DE DANG GZUGS BRNYAN GANG DU SNANG BAS STONG PA GRUB PA’I BLO NI RIGS SHES PHRA [f. 84a] RAGS GANG DU YANG MI ‘ONG NGO,,

And if we do that, then we have established a kind of deceptiveness just relevant to a normal, nominal state of mind—the kind that a person possesses who has never engaged in the philosophical speculation of any particular school of thought.  Thus the state of mind which establishes that this and a reflection in a mirror are empty of what they appear to be cannot be said to be either a subtle or a gross form of exploration into the nature of things.


[1074]
THA SNYAD PA’I BLO RANG DGA’ BA’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’I BDEN GRUB YIN NA YANG, DER SNANG BYUNG NA DES STONG MI ‘ONG LA, DES STONG BYUNG NA’ANG DER SNANG MI ‘ONG BAS, DE GNYIS TSOGS PA BYUNG NA BLO RANG DGA’ BA’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’I BRDZUN PA KHO NA’O,,

And if something existed really in the way that any normal, nominal state of mind might take it to, then when it appeared in a certain way we couldn’t say it was empty of being what it appears to be.  And if by the same rights it were empty of being what it appeared to be, then it couldn’t appear to be that way.  And so if the two occurred in tandem, they could only be something that was deceptive, with regard to a normal state of mind.



The point of the metaphor

[1075]
GSUM PA NI,

Here is the third point in how the system of the Independent section identifies the way in which we hold on to things as being real; that is, how we relate the metaphor of the magician to actual things.


[1076]
SGYU MA’I LTAD MO BA MIG BSLAD PA BZHIN DU SEMS CAN RNAMS KYIS PHYI NANG GI CHOS ‘DI RNAMS BDEN PAR YOD PAR SNANG BA NA, BLO LA SNANG BA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PAR CHOS DE RNAMS KYI SDOD LUGS ZHIG YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA NI, THOG MA MED PA NAS ZHUGS PA’I LHAN SKYES KYI BDEN ‘DZIN NO,,

Now living beings are like members of the audience at a magic show whose eyes are infected by the magic words or powder; all these outer & inner entities appear to them as though they existed really.  Believing that all these entities are not something which is established by their appearing to the mind, but rather something which has some natural existence, is the inborn tendency to believe that things are real—something which has been inside of us for time with no beginning.


[1077]
RANG RGYUD PAS ‘DI LTAR BZHAG PA NI, THAL ‘GYUR BA’I DGAG BYA ‘DZIN PA’I BLO LA LTOS NA SHIN TU RAGS PAS, PHRA BA’I BDEN ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES NI MIN NO,,

This is how the members of the Independent section describe the things; but according to the Consequence section this is far too gross relative to the state of mind that believes in what emptiness denies—and thus cannot constitute the suble form of the inborn version of our tendency to hold that things exist in truth.


[1078]
NAM ZHIG BDEN ‘DZIN DES BZUNG BA’I BDEN GRUB RIGS PAS KHEGS PA NA SGYU MA MKHAN BZHIN DU PHYI NANG GI CHOS RNAMS LA, NANG GI BLO’I DBANG GIS MA BZHAG PA’I SDOD LUGS YOD PAR MI ‘DZIN PAR, BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA’I YOD PA TZAM DU SHES PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

At some point, we are able to use reasoning to deny the real existence that this tendency to hold things as real thinks it sees.  Then we are like the magician: we understand that what we see is nothing more than a creation of the mind—and no longer believe that things possess some natural existence of their own, an existence which is not established from the inside, by our own mind.


[1079]
DE YANG TSAD MAS MI GNOD PA’I BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA RNAMS THA SNYAD DU YOD PAR ‘DOD KYI, BLO’I DBANG GIS GANG BZHAG THAMS CAD THA SNYAD DU YOD PAR MI ‘DOD DO,,

We should note that what they believe is that things which are established by force of a state of mind which is not contradicted by an accurate perception exist nominally; but it is not the case that they believe that all things which are established by the mind exist nominally.


[1080]
SA BON LAS MYU GU SKYE BA BLO’I DBANG GIS BZHAG KYANG, MYU GU RANG GI NGOS NAS SA BON LAS SKYE BA YANG MI ‘GAL BA NI, SPRUL GZHI’I NGOS NAS KYANG RTA GLANG DU SNANG BA DANG ‘DRA STE, DES THA [f. 84b] SNYAD DU YOD PA THAMS CAD SHES PAR BYA’O,,

When a sprout arises from a seed, this is something established by the mind; but it is no contradiction, at the same time, to say that the sprout arises from the seed from its own side: the whole thing is similar to the way in which a horse or elephant appears from the side of the token which is being made to appear as the horse or elephant.  This then is the way that we are to understand everything which exists nominally.


[1081]
CHOS NYID KYANG RANG GANG LA SNANG BA’I BLO’I DBANG GIS YOD PAR ‘JOG PAS, DE THA SNYAD DU YOD PAR ‘JOG PA LA MA KHYAB PA MED DO,,

Even the true nature of things is something which exists by force of the mind of the person to whom it is making its appearance; and it is not the case that it would then necessarily not be something we could describe as existing nominally.


[1082]
DES NA SGYU MA RTA GLANG DU SNANG YANG DES STONG PA BZHIN DU, BUM SOGS THAMS CAD BUM SOGS SU SNANG YANG BUM SOGS KYIS STONG PA NI, SGYU MA DANG CHOS GZHAN RNAMS DPE DON DU SBYOR BA’I DON GTAN MIN TE,,

As such, in the magic show a horse or elephant is making its appearance—but the show is equally empty of any such animals.  The point of using the show as a metaphor for the way other things exist though is not at all meant to say that—even though water pitchers & the like appear to be what they are—they are equally empty of being pitchers or the like.


[1083]
DE LTA NA CHOS DE YIN PA MI SRID PAR ‘GYUR ZHING, DPE DON SBYAR BA YANG DER SNANG BA YIN GYI DE DNGOS MIN PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

If that were the case, then an instance where something were one of these things would have to be impossible; and the point of the metaphor would have to be that things can appear to be what they are, but can never be the actual thing.


[1084]
NAM ZHIG MNYAM GZHAG RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I YE SHES SKYES PA NA, DE’I NGOR GNYIS SNANG THAMS CAD NYE BAR ZHI BA NI MIG MA BSLAD PA LA SGYU MA’I SNANG ZHEN GNYIS KA MED PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

At some point, we are able to give rise—during deep meditation—to wisdom which is beyond all misperceptions.  No manner of discrepancy can make its appearance to this state of mind; it resembles then the state of mind of the person in the audience whose eyes are free of infection: who neither sees the illusory animals, nor believes in them.


[1085]
‘OG NAS RANG RGYUD PAS RIGS PAS ‘GOG TSUL THUN MONG MA YIN PA RNAMS MI STON PAS, ‘DIR DE’I LUGS KYIS CHOS THAMS CAD SGYU MA BZHIN DU ‘CHAR TSUL MDOR BSDUS GO SLA BAR BRJOD NA,

We don’t cover, later on in this text, the unique manner in which the Independent group does their denial of real existence through the use of reasoning.  As such, let us here relate, in brief, the way in which their system describes how all existing things make their appearance, in the manner of an illusion.


[1086]
SHES BYA LA DNGOS POR YOD MED GNYIS SU KHA TSON CHOD PA’I DANG POR DNGOS PO LA BSHAD NA, DNGOS PO LA GZUGS CAN YIN MIN GNYIS SU KHA TSON CHOD CING,

All knowable things break down into those which are functioning things, and those which are not; and so let’s first treat those that function.  These break down further into those which are physical and those which are not.


[1087]
GZUGS CAN LA SHAR LA SOGS PA’I PHYOGS KYI CHA MED DANG, SHES PA LA DUS SNGA PHYI’I CHA MED DGAG PA GZHAN NAS BSHAD PA LTAR BYA LA, DNGOS PO LA CHA BCAS KYIS KHYAB PAR BSGRUB,

The denial here that physical things could be without parts, in the sense of lacking directions such as an eastern side and so on, is as we have explained it elsewhere; the same is true of the denial that mental entities could lack earlier & later parts.  These then prove that functioning things must possess parts.


[1088]
DE NAS CHA DANG CHA CAN GNYIS KA NGO BO THA DAD NA ‘BREL MED DU ‘GYUR BAS DGAG LA NGO BO GCIG TU BSTAN,

Next comes the denial that the parts and the thing which possesses the parts could be such that to be one were not to be the other—in which case they would be unrelated.  As such, they are shown to have a relationship such that to be one is to be the other.


[1089]
DE’I TSE DE LA YID JI LTAR GTAD PA NA, YIN TSUL NGO BO [f. 85a] GCIG YIN KYANG SNANG TSUL LA NGO BO THA DAD DU SNANG BA SNYON DU MED PAS, SGYU MA BZHIN DU DER SNANG BA DANG DES STONG PA GNYIS TSOGS PAR GTAN LA DBAB,

It is indisputable though that—when we focus our mind on them—they appear to be such that to be one is not to be the other, despite the fact that the opposite is true.  As such then, we establish the combination of appearing one way—in the manner of a magic show—and at the same time being in fact empty of such.


[1090]
DE NAS DE ‘DRA DE BLO LA SNANG BA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA’I BRDZUN PA’I SDOD LUGS LA ‘GAL BA MED KYANG, GZHI DE BLO LA SNANG BA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PA’I SDOD LUGS YIN NA GTAN MI RIGS TE, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I BDEN GRUB LA GNAS TSUL DANG SNANG TSUL MI MTHUN PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR TE,

As such, it is no contradiction to say that this kind of thing does possess its own nature, of being deceptive—a nature which is established by what appears to the mind.  At the same time, it would be completely incorrect to say that the object involved possessed a kind of self-nature which was not established by what appears to the mind.  And that’s because it would be impossible for something which existed as real to exist in a way which was inconsistent with the way it appeared.


[1091]
BDEN PAR GRUB NA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU BRDZUN PA SPANGS TE GNAS DGOS PA’I PHYIR DANG, NGO BO THA DAD DU SNANG BA’I BLO DE MA ‘KHRUL BAR ‘GRO DGOS PAS NGO BO GCIG PA LA GNOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This in turn is the case because—if something were to exist really—then it would have to remain in a state free of all manner of deception.  Moreover, that would also necessitate that the state of mind to which the parts and the whole appeared to be such that to be one were not necessarily to be the other would have to be unmistaken—which would in turn draw into question the idea that to be one is to be the other.


[1092]
DE GRUB NA NI DNGOS POR MED PA RNAMS BDEN PAR GRUB PA YANG RIGS PA DE LA BRTEN NAS ‘GOG NUS TE, ‘DUS MA BYAS KYI NAM MKHA’ LA YANG GZUGS CAN ‘GA’ ZHIG LA KHYAB PA KHAS BLANG DGOS LA, DE LA YANG SHAR LA KHYAB PA’I CHA DANG PHYOGS GZHAN LA KHYAB PA’I CHA KHAS BLANG DGOS SO,,

Once all these facts have been proven, we can use the same reasoning to deny that things which are not functional could ever exist as real.  We have to accept, for example, that the kind of space which is not a product of causes & conditions extends to certain numbers of physical objects; and that this space then would have to have one section which extended to the east, and other sections which extended to the other directions.


[1093]
DE BZHIN DU CHOS NYID LA YANG KHYAB PA’I CHA DU MA DANG, BLO SNGA PHYI THA DAD KYIS RTOGS PA’I CHA THA DAD PA DU MA YOD LA, ‘DUS MA BYAS GZHAN YANG DE DANG ‘DRA BAS, CHA DU MA DANG CHA CAN GNYIS NGO BO THA DAD MI RUNG BAS NGO BO GCIG PA DANG,

Similarly, there are many parts to suchness—extending to different objects; and there are different parts to what a single mind perceives: the fact of something perceived earlier, or something perceived later.  Other examples of existing things that are unproduced are the same; and since it would be incorrect to say that the many parts of a thing and the thing that possessed the many parts were not such that to be one were to be the other, then we would have to say that to be one was to be the other.


[1094]
DE BRDZUN PA LA RUNG GI BDEN GRUB LA MI RUNG BAS, SNGAR BZHIN BKAG PAS SHES BYA THAMS CAD BDEN MED DU ‘GRUB BO,,

All this would fit things if they were deceptive; and could never fit things if they were real.  As such, we successfully deny—just as we did before—that real things could exist; and thereby establish that all objects in the universe exist in a way which is unreal.


[1095]
DE LTAR [f. 85b] BYED PA ZHI BA ‘TSO YAB SRAS KYI BZHED PA YIN PAS, CHA DANG CHA CAN DNGOS PO KHO NA LA RTZI BA NI BLO GROS CHUNGS PA’I SKYON NO,,

Going through the process this way is the position that Master Shanta Rakshita and his spiritual son accept; as such, performing the process with parts & wholes only with regard to functioning things reveals the fault that a person possesses insufficient intellect.


[1096]
GRUB MTHAS BLO MA BSGYUR BA LA GRAGS PA’I BRDZUN PA NI DBU MA PA ‘DOD PA’I BRDZUN PA DANG DON MI GCIG PAS BLOS BZHAG KYANG DE DAG LA GRAGS PA LTAR YIN GYI, RANG LUGS LA DE TZAM LA BLOS BZHAG TU MI ‘DOD DO,,

The idea of deception entertained by a person who has not been trained in philosophy is not the same thing as the idea of deception accepted by a thinker who belongs to the middle way; thus we can say that—although what it means to be a “creation of the mind” is similar to its understanding current among the former—in the system being described here that in itself would not suffice for what we’re calling “established by the mind.”


[1097]
DE LTAR NA BLO LA SNANG BA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PA’I SDOD LUGS MED KYANG, DE’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA’I SDOD LUGS MING DU BTAGS PA TZAM MIN PA CIG YOD PA LUGS ‘DI LA MI ‘GAL BAS, DBU MA PA GNYIS KYI DGAG BYA LA BLO’I NGOR MI ‘DRA BA CHEN PO ‘ONG NGO,,

As such they would say that there exists no natural way of existing which is not established by how a thing appears to the mind; but you should understand that in this system it would be no contradiction then to say that there was a natural way of existing which were so established, and were not nothing more than a product of the naming process.  And therefore when you bring to mind the thing that emptiness denies, in the two different versions accepted by these two sections within the Middle Way school, they should strike you as entirely different.


[1098]
DE LTAR GYI GANG ZAG LA LUGS ‘DI’I BDEN PA DANG BDEN ‘DZIN GYI NGOS ‘DZIN DANG, DE ‘GOG PA’I RIGS PA MDOR BSDUS LA LEGS PAR KHRID NAS, DE’I ‘OG TU THAL ‘GYUR BA’I LUGS BSTAN NA LTA BA DMIGS LEGS PAR PHYED PAR MTHONG NAS ‘DIR BSHAD PA YIN NO,,

I have taken the time here to give you this description of the Independent group’s beliefs because I’ve observed that when you give this kind of person a brief but strong presentation of what the group thinks “real” means; and how they describe a belief in it; and the reasoning they use to put a stop to this belief, then the person will be able to make perfect distinctions between that view and the system propounded by the Consequence group within the same Middle Way school.



The position of the Consequence group

[1099]
GNYIS PA NI, LUGS ‘DI LA CHOS RNAMS RTOG PA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA TZAM GYI ‘JOG TSUL SHES NA, DE LAS BZLOG STE ‘DZIN PA’I BDEN ‘DZIN BDE BLAG TU SHES PAR ‘GYUR BAS,

This brings us to our second step from above, which is how the system of the Consequence section of the Middle Way school identifies the way in which we hold on to things as being real.  Now if you understand how this system says that things are established simply by force of ideas, then you will with ease understand what it is to hold that things exist the opposite way: to hold things as “real.”


[1100]
‘DI LA GNYIS, CHOS RNAMS RTOG PA’I DBANG GIS ‘JOG TSUL DANG, DE LAS BZLOG STE ‘DZIN PA’I BDEN ‘DZIN BSTAN PA’O,,

We’ll proceed then in two parts: how it is that things are established by force of ideas; followed by a presentation of what it is to hold things as real: as the opposite of something created by ideas.



Things are creations of thoughts

[1101]
DANG PO NI, NYE BAR ‘KHOR GYIS ZHUS PA LAS,
,SNA TSOGS YID DGA’ ME TOG KHA BYE ZHING,
,GSER GYI KHANG MCHOG ‘BAR BA YID ‘ONG BA,
,’DI NA DE LA’ANG BYED PA ‘GA’ MED DE,
,DE DAG [f. 86a] RTOG PA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA YIN,
,RTOG PA’I DBANG GIS ‘JIG RTEN RNAM BRTAGS TE,

Here is the first; we begin with lines from The Sutra Requested by Upali:

Flowers break open
In a rainbow of pleasing colors;
Perfect palaces of pure gold
Blaze in lovely light.

But there was no creator
Who crafted any of it—
They are all creations
Of thoughts;

The world is all made up
By our thoughts.


[1102]
ZHES CHOS RNAMS RTOG PA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PAR GSUNGS TE, CHOS THAMS CAD RTOG PAS BTAGS PA TZAM DANG RTOG PA’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PAR GSUNGS PA GZHAN YANG MANG NGO,,

What this is saying is that all the things in the universe are creations of our thoughts—and there are many other statements in scripture that describe how none of these things are anything but projections of our thoughts: creations of our thoughts.


[1103]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LAS KYANG,
,’JIG RTEN MA RIG RKYEN CAN DU,
,GANG PHYIR RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS GSUNGS,
,DE YI PHYIR NA ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI,
,RNAM RTOG YIN ZHES CIS MI ‘THAD,

The Sixty Verses on Reasoning say as well:

The totally enlightened Buddha
Himself has stated that this world
Was born from misunderstanding.

Why then would it be
An overstatement to say
That the world is just
Our imagination?


[1104]
CES GSUNGS PA’I DON ‘GREL PAR ‘JIG RTEN RNAMS RANG GI NGO BOS MA GRUB PA RTOG PAS BTAGS PA TZAM DU BSHAD CING, BRGYA PA LAS KYANG,

The commentary explains these lines as meaning that the various worlds which exist are simply creations of thoughts; none of them exists through any nature of its own.  The 400 Verses says as well:


[1105]
,RTOG PA MED PAR ‘DOD CHAGS LA,
,SOGS LA YOD NYID YOD MIN NA,
,YANG DAG DON DANG RTOG PA ZHES,
,BLO DANG LDAN PA SU ZHIG ‘DZIN,

Without thoughts
It would be impossible
For desire & the rest
To exist at all.

Who then
With a brain in their head
Could ever speak

Of something pure,
Or of thought that’s pure?


[1106]
ZHES GSUNGS SHING DE’I ‘GREL PA LAS KYANG, RTOG PA YOD PA KHO NAS YOD PA NYID DANG, RTOG PA MED PAR YOD PA NYID MED PA DE DAG NI, GOR MA CHAG PAR THAG PA BSDOGS PA LA BTAGS PA’I SBRUL LTAR RANG GI NGO BOS MA GRUB PAR NGES SO, ZHES GSUNGS TE YANG DAG DON NI RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA’O, ,RTOG PA NI DE LA BLTOS TE SKYE BA’O,,

The commentary to the same work says that

Existence itself can exist only through thought; and non-existence itself only through an absence of thought.  It is certain, beyond any question, that neither of these can exist through any nature of its own: they are ropes called “snakes.”


[1107]
‘GREL PA DER CHAGS SOGS RNAMS THAG PA LA SBRUL DU BTAGS PA LTAR GSUNGS PA NI MTSON PA TZAM STE, CHOS GZHAN THAMS CAD KYANG THAG PA LA SBRUL DU BTAGS PA LTAR RTOG PAS BZHAG PAR ‘CHAD PA’O,,

When the commentary says here that desire and such for these things is like calling a rope a snake, it’s just taking one example; what it’s actually saying is that every other object in the universe is equally a creation of thought—just the way that we call a rope a snake.


[1108]
DE LA KHRA BO’I MDOG DANG ‘KHYIL LUGS SBRUL DANG ‘DRA ZHING, YUL MI GSAL BAR SNANG [f. 86b] BA NA THAG PA LA ‘DI SBRUL LO SNYAM PA ‘BYUNG NGO,,

Here the checkered pattern & coiled shape resemble those of a snake; and in a case where the object appears indistinctly, we think to ourselves, “It’s a snake!”


[1109]
DE’I TSE THAG PA LA THAG PA’I TSOGS PA DANG CHA SHAS SBRUL GYI MTSAN GZHIR ‘JOG RGYU CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PAS, DE’I SBRUL NI RTOG PAS BTAGS PA TZAM MO,,

At that moment, there is not the slightest thing about the rope—neither in the combination of its parts nor in its parts taken individually—which we could point to as being a snake; and that’s why we could say that the “snake” here is simply labeled by our thoughts.


[1110]
DE BZHIN DU PHUNG PO LA BRTEN NAS NGA’O SNYAM PA ‘BYUNG BA NA, PHUNG PO’I STENG NAS SNGA PHYI’I RGYUN GYI TSOGS PA DANG, DUS GCIG PA’I TSOGS PA DANG DE’I CHA SHAS DE’I MTSAN GZHIR ‘JOG RGYU CUNG ZAD KYANG MED DE RGYAS PAR ‘OG NAS ‘CHAD DO,,

The same thing happens when we look at the parts of ourselves and think, “It’s me.”  At that point, there is not the slightest thing about these parts—neither in the collection of its earlier or later parts as it flows through time; nor in the collection of its parts considered in a single moment; nor in the individual parts themselves—which we could point to as being this “me.”  We’ll go into this in more detail below.


[1111]
DE’I PHYIR DANG PHUNG PO’I CHA DANG CHA CAN LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I DE’I GZHIR ‘DZIN RGYU YANG CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PAS, NGA DE NI RTOG PAS PHUNG PO LA BRTEN NAS BZHAG PA TZAM YIN GYI, RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA MED DO,,

For this reason—and because there is not the least thing which is such that to be it would be not to be either the component pieces of the parts to ourselves, or the thing which possesses those parts, which could still be considered the basis of this “me”—we can say that this “me” is simply a label applied to the parts of ourselves by our thoughts.  There is nothing there which exists through some essential nature of its own.


[1112]
‘DI NI RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG GSUNGS TE,
,SKYES BU SA MIN CHU MA YIN,
,ME MIN RLUNG MIN NAM MKHA’ MIN,
,RNAM SHES MA YIN KUN MIN NA,
,DE LAS GZHAN NA SKYES BU GANG,
ZHES SO,,

This too is why the String of Jewels says:

The individual is neither earth nor water,
Nor fire nor wind nor space;
Nor consciousness itself.

If the person then is none of these,
How could it be something else?


[1113]
DE LA SKYES BU NI GANG ZAG DANG SEMS CAN DANG NGA DANG BDAG GO ,SA MIN NAS RNAM SHES MA YIN PA’I BAR GYIS SEMS CAN GYI KHAMS DRUG GI CHA SHAS DANG, KUN MIN GYIS KHAMS KYI TSOGS PA GANG YANG GANG ZAG TU ‘JOG PA BKAG GO ,TSIG THA MAS KHAMS LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA GANG ZAG TU ‘JOG PA BKAG GO

The word “individual” here refers to the person; or the living being; the “I” or the “self.”  The list of what it is not—which goes from “earth” up to “consciousness”—refers to the parts of a living being: the six elements which make them up.  The phrase “none of these” is meant to deny that there is any combination of these elements which we can posit as being the person.  And then the final part serves to deny that there is something which is such that to be it would not to be the person, which could still be posited as being the person.


[1114]
,DE LTA NA’ANG GANG ZAG KHAS MI LEN PA NI MIN LA, KUN GZHI RNAM SHES SOGS GANG ZAG TU BZHED PA YANG MIN PAS, ‘GREL PA MDZAD PAS BKRAL BA LTAR ‘PHAGS PA YANG BZHED DO,,

Despite all this though, it is not the case that the person themselves is being denied.  Nor does the author accept that something like foundation consciousness is the person.  As such, the Realized One himself would accept the interpretation of these lines by the author of the autocommentary.


[1115]
GANG ZAG RTOG PAS [f. 87a] BZHAG LUGS DE LTAR SHES NA, CHOS GZHAN THAMS CAD KYANG RTOG PAS BZHAG LUGS DE DANG ‘DRA STE, TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI RGYAL PO LAS,

Once we grasp this presentation of how the person is a creation of ideas, we can apply it to the way in which all other existing things are also creations of thought.  As the King of Concentration puts it,


	[1116]
,JI LTAR KHYOD KYIS BDAG GI ‘DU SHES NI,
,SHES PA DE BZHIN KUN LA BLOS SBYAR BYA,
ZHES DANG,

Take your understanding
Of the concept of a self
And apply it to everything else.


[1117]
‘PHAGS PA SDUD PA LAS KYANG,
,BDAG JI ‘DRA DE DE ‘DRAR SEMS CAN THAMS CAD SHES,
,SEMS CAN THAMS CAD JI ‘DRA DE ‘DRAR CHOS KUN SHES,
ZHES GSUNGS SHING,

The Briefer Version of the Perfection of Wisdom says as well,

Understand every living being
In the same way you understand yourself.

Understand every existing thing
In the same way you understand beings.


[1118]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,SKYES BU KHAMS DRUG ‘DUS PA’I PHYIR,
,YANG DAG MA YIN JI LTA BAR,
,DE BZHIN KHAMS NI RE RE YANG,
,’DUS PHYIR YANG DAG NYID DU MIN,
ZHES GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

The String of Precious Jewels puts it this way:

The individual encompasses
Six different elements;
And so cannot be pure.

Each of the elements as well
Encompasses parts of its own,
So can neither be something pure.


[1119]
RKANG PA DANG PO’I DON NI SKYES BU KHAMS DRUG ‘DUS PA LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’O, ,RKANG PA GSUM PA DANG BZHI PA’I DON NI CHA DANG CHA CAN MED PA MI SRID PAS, KHAMS RE RE YANG RANG GI CHA DU MA ‘DUS PA LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I PHYIR, YANG DAG TU STE RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA MIN PA’O,,

The point of the first two lines here is to say that “individual” is a label that we give to the combination of the six elements.  The last three lines express the fact that—since it is impossible that anything could be devoid of being a whole and its parts—each of the elements is as well a label that we put upon a combination of multiple parts.  As such, neither can they be “pure”—meaning something which exists through some nature of its own.


[1120]
DE YANG CHA SHAS ‘DUS PA LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA YIN NA, CHA SHAS DANG CHA CAN DE DE’I GZHIR ‘JOG TU MI RUNG LA, DE GNYIS LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA YANG DE’I GZHIR MI SRID PA’O,,

Now if something is just the result of a label applied to a collection of parts, we cannot say that either the parts or the whole is its basis; and it would be impossible for something else—something that was not such that to be it was to be these two—to be this basis either.


[1121]
BUM PA LA SOGS PA RNAMS RTOG PAS BZHAG LUGS KYI CHA DE TZAM ZHIG ,THAG PA LA SBRUL DU BTAGS PA DANG ‘DRA BA YIN KYANG, BUM SOGS RNAMS DANG THAG PA’I SBRUL GNYIS YOD MED DANG BYA BA BYED PAR NUS MI NUS SOGS NI GTAN MI ‘DRA STE, DE GNYIS KYI THA SNYAD [f. 87b] NGES PAR BYA DGOS MI DGOS DANG, THA SNYAD BYED PA LA GNOD PA YOD MED SOGS RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MI MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As far as the way that things like a water pitcher are creations of thoughts, this one part of the process is similar to the way in which we label a rope a snake.  Pitchers and such though are completely dissimilar to rope-snakes with regard to whether they exist or not; or whether they can perform a function; and so on.  And that’s because whether or not they definitely deserve the name they receive—and whether or not the name given to them can be questioned, and so on—is in no respect at all the same.


[1122]
RTOG PAS BZHAG PA DE LA RANG RANG GI BYA BYED ‘THAD PA NI, TSIG DANG DON GYI ‘GREL MDZAD RNAMS KYI NANG NAS, SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS DANG ZHI BA LHA DANG SLOB DPON ‘DI GSUM GYIS ‘PHAGS PA YAB SRAS GNYIS KYI ‘GREL LUGS THUN MONG MA YIN PA’O, ,DBU MA’I LTA BA MTHAR THUG PA’I DKA’ SA YANG ‘DI NYID DO,,

Let’s talk about the concept that things which are creations of ideas can nonetheless quite properly perform their individual functions.  Of all those who have written commentaries upon both the wording & meaning of these scriptures, three have captured the unique thinking of the Realized One and his spiritual son on this question; these are Buddha Palita, Shantideva, and our master here.  This is in fact the ultimate point of difficulty in understanding the view of the middle way. 


[1123]
DE LTAR BYAS NA RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,GZUGS KYI DNGOS PO MING TZAM PHYIR,
,NAM MKHA’ YANG NI MING TZAM MO,,
‘BYUNG MED GZUGS LTA GA LA YOD,
,DE PHYIR MING TZAM NYID KYANG MED,
,TSOR DANG ‘DU SHES ‘DU BYED DANG,
,RNAM SHES ‘BYUNG BA LTA BU DANG,
,BDAG BZHIN DU NI BSAM BYA STE,
,DE PHYIR KHAMS DRUG BDAG MED DO,
ZHES DANG,

It is to this point that the String of Precious Jewels says,

Things that are physical
Are no more than names;
And so space as well
Is no more than name.

If it never happened,
Then how could the physical?

And so the same
Is true for being
No more than name, itself.

Consider feelings,
And discrimination,
And the other factors,
And consciousness,
And the self itself
As being the same;

Thus it is
That none of the six elements
Can ever be itself.


[1124]
,THA SNYAD GDAGS PA MA GTOGS PAR,
,GANG ZHIG YOD DAM MED ‘GYUR BA’I,
,’JIG RTEN DON DU CI ZHIG YOD,

There is nothing
In the entire world,
Whether it exists
Or not,

Which is anything
But named with names.


[1125]
CES DON DAM PAR MING TZAM YANG MED PA DANG, THA SNYAD DU MING GI THA SNYAD KYI DBANG GIS BZHAG PA TZAM MA GTOGS PA CI YANG MED PAR GSUNGS PA LTAR MING DU BTAGS PA TZAM DU GNAS SO,,

What these lines are saying is that, ultimately speaking, not even the fact that things are nothing but names exists; and that—on a nominal level—there is nothing in the universe outside of those things which exist only by force of being called by a name.  As such, we are left only with things that are labeled, with names.


[1126]
DE RNAMS LEGS PAR SHES NA CHOS THAMS CAD BRTEN NAS GZHAG DGOS PA DANG, BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA DANG BRTEN NAS SKYES PA NYID KYIS RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA MED PA DANG, THA SNYAD GZHAN GYI DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PA’I RANG DBANG BA’I NGO BO MED PA DANG, CHOS GANG YOD PAR ‘JOG NA’ANG BTAGS DON MA BTZAL BAR ‘JOG [f. 88a] PA RNAMS LEGS PAR SHES PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If you understand these points well, then you can see how everything in the universe must depend on something else to be established; and the fact that things are labeled in dependence—the fact that things start in dependence—proves that they cannot exist through some nature of their own.  You can see there is no independent essence of things, where they are anything which is not established by force of other things—by the names used for them.  You can realize, perfectly, that no matter what object in the world that you say exists, you cannot go looking for what it is that we give the name.



What it is to hold things as real

[1127]
GNYIS PA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I MING GI THA SNYAD KYI DBANG TZAM GYIS BZHAG PA MIN PA’I YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA NI, BDEN PA DANG DON DAM PAR DANG YANG DAG TU GRUB PA DANG, RANG GI NGO BOS DANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS DANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA LHAN SKYES YIN LA, DES BZUNG BA’I ZHEN YUL NI BRTAG PA MTHA’ BZUNG GI BDEN TSAD DO,,

Here is the second part from above: a presentation of what it is to hold things as real—as the opposite of something created by ideas.  Now suppose we hold on to something as not simply being a creation of names.  The version of this tendency that we were born with holds that things exist really; ultimately; purely—it believes that things exist through some essential nature of their own; by definition; naturally.  And the object that this belief thinks it sees is the theoretical measure of a thing that could be “real.”


[1128]
DGAG BYA LA DON DAM GYI KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA’I DON DAM LA TSUL GNYIS SHES DGOS PA NI ‘DIR YANG ‘DRA LA, DBU MA RANG RGYUD PA RNAMS BDEN PA SOGS GSUM DU GRUB PA SHES BYA LA MI SRID PAR BZHED KYANG,

Remember that we had to understand the two senses of the word “ultimate” when we spoke of “ultimate” with reference to what emptiness denies; here the case is the same.  Those who belong to the Independent group within the Middle Way school take the position that the three of existing really and so on are not possible among all the things in the universe which exist. 


[1129]
RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA SOGS GSUM NI THA SNYAD DU YOD PAR BZHED DE, DE KHO NA NYID SHIN TU PHRA BA RE ZHIG LA BDE BLAG TU RTOGS MI NUS PA RNAMS, DE LA BKRI BA’I THABS LA MKHAS PA CHEN POR MTHONG NGO,,

At the same time though they assert that the other three—of existing through some nature of their own, and so on—do exist, nominally.  They consider it a truly skillful method to guide a student through these concepts, in a case where this student is incapable, for the time being, of easily comprehending the extremely subtle form of suchness.


[1130]
DE LTAR CHOS RNAMS KYI NGO BO YUL CAN THA SNYAD KYI RTOG PA GZHAN LA RAG MA LAS PA STE, DE’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PA’I RANG BZHIN DE NYID LA DGAG BYA’I BDAG CES BYA LA,

As such, an essential nature of existing things would be something that does not rely upon some other, subject state of mind which is a nominal perception.  And so what we call the “self” in terms of being what emptiness denies is precisely this kind of self-nature: one which does not require being established by force of such a perception.


[1131]
DE NYID KHYAD GZHI GANG ZAG GI STENG DU MED PA NI GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED DANG, MIG SNA {%RNA} SOGS CHOS KYI STENG DU MED PA NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED DU GSUNGS PAS,

When we say that this kind of self-nature is a quality which is absent with regard to an object which is a person, this is the “lack of a self-nature to the person.”  When we say that it’s a quality which is absent with regard to an object which is a “thing”—in the sense of the eye, or ear, or so on—it is the “lack of a self-nature to things.”


[1132]
RANG BZHIN DE GANG ZAG DANG CHOS KYI STENG DU YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA NI BDAG GNYIS KYI ‘DZIN PAR SHUGS KYIS RTOGS TE, BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, DE LA BDAG CES BYA BA NI GANG ZHIG DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI GZHAN LA RAG MA [f. 88b] LAS PA’I NGO BO RANG BZHIN TE, DE MED PA NI BDAG MED PA’O, , DE NI CHOS DANG GANG ZAG GI DBYE BAS GNYIS SU RTOGS TE, CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA DANG GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED PA ZHES BYA’O, ZHES PA LTAR STE,

We can then understand, by implication, that to hold that this kind of nature could in fact apply to a person or to things is what it is to “believe in the two kinds of a self-nature.”  As the commentary to the 400 Verses puts it,

When we say “self-nature,” what we’re talking about is some essence or nature where entities could not rely upon other things.  The general absence of this is what we call the “lack of a self-nature.”  Understand that this comes in two versions: that which applies to things, and that which applies to people.  Which is to say, we speak of the “lack of a self-nature to things,” and the “lack of a self-nature to people.”


[1133]
‘DI NYID LAS KYANG, CHOS DANG GANG ZAG DBYE BAS RNAM GNYIS GSUNGS, ZHES BDAG MED GNYIS DGAG BYA’I SGO NAS MA PHYE BAR GZHI CHOS CAN GYIS ‘BYED PAR BSHAD DO,,

The same author says—

Two types were spoken; we divide them out into that of things, and that of people.

What this is saying is that the division into two kinds of a lack of self-nature is made not with regard to what emptiness denies; but rather on the basis of the thing which possesses the lack.


[1134]
BDAG ‘DZIN GYI ‘JIG LTA LHAN SKYES LA NI RTZA BAR PHUNG PO DMIGS PA YIN PA BKAG CING, ‘GREL PAR BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG DMIGS PAR GSUNGS PAS, NGA’O SNYAM PA TZAM ZHIG SKYE BA’I DMIGS PA’I NGA TZAM DANG, GANG ZAG TZAM ZHIG LA DMIGS PAR BYA’O,,

It is denied in the root text that the tendency to hold to some self-nature—in the form of the inborn view of destruction—is directed towards the parts of a person; this view is further stated in the autocommentary to be directed towards a person’s self, in the sense of the self which is labeled in dependence.  As such we are to understand that it is directed towards the simple “me,” the simple person, which when we focus upon it the thought comes into our mind, “This is me.”


[1135]
RNAM PA NI RANG ‘GREL LAS, NGAR ‘DZIN PAS YOD PA MA YIN PA’I BDAG YOD DO SNYAM DU NYE BAR BRTAGS NAS, ‘DI NYID DU BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN CING, ZHES GSUNGS PAS NGA DE BDEN PAR GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’O,,

As for how this view sees things, the autocommentary says, “Our tendency to believe in a ‘me’ imagines that a self which does not exist does exist; and it feels that this self exists in truth.”  As such, this view holds that the “me” is something which exists really.


[1136]
GZHAN YANG RANG ‘GREL LAS, DE LA ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA NI NGA DANG NGA’I SNYAM PA DE LTA BU’I RNAM PAR ZHUGS PA SHES RAB NYON MONGS PA CAN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR ‘JIG LTA LHAN SKYES KYI DMIGS PA LA NGA’O SNYAM PA’I BLO NGANG GIS SKYE BA DGOS PAS, RGYUD GZHAN GYI GANG ZAG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I LHAN SKYES GANG ZAG GI BDAG ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES YIN KYANG ‘JIG LTA LHAN SKYES MIN NO,,

In addition, the autocommentary further states: “Now the view of the collection which will be destroyed is a kind of negative intellect which engages in things thinking ‘me’ or ‘mine’.”  What this is saying is that when we’re talking about what the inborn version of the view of destruction is directed towards, there must be a state of mind which comes up on its own accord and thinks to itself, “me.”  An inborn tendency where we hold that the person—in the sense of the person subsumed by another person’s mindstream—exists by definition constitutes an inborn tendency to believe in a self-nature; but it does not constitute the inborn version of the view of destruction.


[1137]
NGA DANG NGA’I SNYAM PA’I RNAM PAR ZHUGS ZHES PAS NI NGA TZAM DANG NGA YI BA TZAM ‘DZIN STANGS KYI RNAM PA’I YUL DU STON [f. 89a] PA MIN GYI, DE GNYIS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I RNAM PA CAN DU STON PA’O,,

When the autocommentary here mentions “engaging in things thinking ‘me’ or ‘mine’,” this is not meant to indicate that the object which this view thinks it sees is the simple “me,” or the simple “mine.”  Rather, the reference is to a state of mind which sees its object in a way where it holds that these two exist by definition.


[1138]
BDAG GIR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTA LHAN SKYES KYI DMIGS PA NI, NGA YI BA NYID YIN GYI, RANG GI MIG SOGS DMIGS PAR MI BZUNG NGO, ,RNAM PA NI DMIGS PA DE LA DMIGS NAS NGA YI BA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’O,,

What is the object that the inborn view of destruction which is holding to a “mine” focuses upon?  It is the idea of “mine” itself; the point is not that it is holding to ones eye or the like.  And the way that this view holds its object is that it focuses upon it and holds that “mine” is something which exists by definition.


[1139]
‘O NA BDAG GI ‘DI ZHES ZHES PA’I RANG ‘GREL LAS, ‘DI NI BDAG GI’O SNYAM DU NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I YUL LAS GZHAN PA’I DNGOS PO’I RNAM PA MA LUS PA LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PA YIN NO, ZHES MIG LA SOGS PA’I GZHI LA DMIGS NAS ‘DI NI BDAG GI YIN NO SNYAM DU ZHEN PA BDAG GIR ‘DZIN PAR BSHAD PA JI LTAR YIN SNYAM NA,

The following question might then arise in ones mind:

Now then; at the point where it mentions “We say of them ‘mine’,” the autocommentary also states that “when we say ‘mine,’ we hold a false belief in all entities other than the object we hold when we say ‘me’.”  What about this particular reference, which seems to be saying that when we focus on objects such as the eye and believe in them, wrongly—thinking that “this is mine”—then this is the tendency to hold things as “mine”?


[1140]
DE NI MIG SOGS RNAMS BDAG GI BAR MTHONG NAS BDAG GI BA LA BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA’I DON YIN GYI, BDAG GI BA’I MTSAN GZHI MIG SOGS DMIGS PAR STON PA MIN TE, DE LTAR MA YIN NA ‘JIG LTA DANG CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS MI ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

The point of this reference though is to say that we see the eye and so on as being something of mine, and then hold the false belief that it is something of mine in a real sense.  This is not though meant to indicate that we are directing our perceptions towards the eye and so on as a classical example of the concept of “mine.”  If this were not the case, then the two of the view of destruction and the tendency to believe in a self-nature of things would no longer be mutually exclusive.


[1141]
CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES KYI DMIGS PA NI, RANG GZHAN GYI RGYUD KYI GZUGS PHUNG SOGS DANG, MIG RNA SOGS DANG, RGYUD KYIS MA BSDUS PA’I SNOD LA SOGS PA’O, ,RNAM PA NI SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR RO,,

What is it that the inborn version of our tendency to hold to a self-nature of things focuses upon?  We can include here the physical part of a person, and so on, included both within our own being and the being of another person; as well as things like the eye & ear; and things not subsumed by a mindstream—such as the outer world & the like.


[1142]
DE LTAR BDAG GNYIS SU ‘DZIN PA DE NI ‘KHOR BAR ‘CHING BA’I MA RIG PA YIN TE, STONG NYID BDUN CU PA LAS,
,RGYU DANG RKYEN LAS SKYES DNGOS RNAMS,
,YANG DAG PAR NI RTOG PA GANG,
,DE NI STON PAS MA RIG [f. 89b] GSUNGS,
,DE LAS YANG {%YAN} LAG BCU GNYIS ‘BYUNG,

This way of believing in the two kinds of a self-nature is the misunderstanding that chains us to the cycle of pain.  As the Seventy Verses on Emptiness puts it,

The idea that things
Which are born
From causes & conditions
Could ever be something pure

Was described by the Teacher
As misunderstanding;

And it is from this
That the twelve links spring.


[1143]
ZHES CHOS KYI DNGOS PO LA DMIGS NAS YANG DAG TU GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BA’I MA RIG PAR GSUNGS TE, CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN DE LAS GANG ZAG GI BDAG ‘DZIN GYI MA RIG PA ‘BYUNG BAS, DE LAS BCU GNYIS ‘BYUNG BAR BSHAD DO,,

What this is saying is that it was stated that our tendency to focus upon entities, or “things,” and to take them as existing purely is the misunderstanding which is the root of the cycle of pain.  Misunderstanding in the form of holding to some self-nature of the person derives from this tendency to believe in a self-nature to things.  And from it then come the twelve.


[1144]
MA RIG PA DE LDOG PA LA DES JI LTAR BZUNG BAS STONG PA DANG, JI LTAR BZUNG BA’I BDAG MED PAR MTHONG BA DGOS TE, STONG NYID BDUN CU PA LAS,

If we want to put a stop to this misunderstanding, then we have to see that objects are empty of existing the way that this state of mind holds them to be; which is to say, we have to see that the self-nature which this mind holds to is non-existent.  Again, the Seventy Verses on Emptiness puts it this way:


	[1145]
,YANG DAG MTHONG PHYIR DNGOS STONG BAR,
,LEGS SHES MA RIG MI ‘BYUNG BA,
,DE NI MA RIG ‘GAG PA YIN,
,DE PHYIR YAN LAG BCU GNYIS ‘GAG
,CES DANG,

When our sight is pure,
We totally grasp
That things are empty;

And then misunderstanding
Can no longer come.

This is the end
Of misunderstanding,

And because of it
The twelve links too
Come to an end.


[1146]
CHOS DBYINGS BSTOD PA LAS KYANG,
,BDAG DANG BDAG GI ZHES ‘DZIN PAS,
,JI SRID PHYI ROL RNAM BRTAGS PA,
,BDAG MED RNAM PA GNYIS MTHONG NA,
,SRID PA’I SA BON ‘GAG PAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES DANG,

A Praise of the Realm of Reality says as well,

For a time
We imagine, out there,
A “me” and also “mine.”

But if we see the two versions
Of a lack of self-nature,

Then the seeds of suffering life
Come to a stop.


	[1147]
,MCHOG TU SEMS NI SBYONG BYED PA’I,
,CHOS NI RANG BZHIN MED PA YIN,
ZHES DANG,

It also says,

The one teaching
Which is highest
For purifying our minds

Is the fact that nothing
Has any nature of its own.


[1148]
BZHI BRGYA PA LAS KYANG,
,YUL LA BDAG MED MTHONG NA NI,
,SRID PA’I SA BON ‘GAG PAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES DANG,

The 400 Verses also states:

Once we see in things
That they have no nature
Of their own,

The seeds for suffering life
Come to a stop.


	[1149]
,DE PHYIR NYON MONGS THAMS CAD KYANG,
,GTI MUG BCOM PAS BCOM PAR ‘GYUR,
,RTEN CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA NI,
,MTHONG NA GTI MUG ‘BYUNG MI ‘GYUR,
,DE PHYIR ‘BAD PA KUN GYIS ‘DIR,
,GTAM DE KHO NA BSNYAD PAR BYA,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

It says as well—

And so we can say
That every negative thought
Is destroyed when we destroy
Dark ignorance.

If we see how things
Occur in connection
And dependence,

Then this darkness
Can never come again.

And this is why
I have spent my all,

Repeating here this message—
Repeating this one message.


[1150]
DE LTAR GSUNGS PA’I GTI MUG NI DUG GSUM GYI YA GYAL GYI GTI MUG NGOS ‘DZIN PA’I SKABS YIN PAS, NYON MONGS CAN [f. 90a] GYI MA RIG PA YIN ZHING, MA RIG PA DE LDOG PA LA STONG PA RTEN ‘BYUNG GI DON DU SHAR BA’I RTEN ‘BREL ZAB MO’I DON RTOGS DGOS PAR GSUNGS SO,,

As for the dark ignorance described in these lines, we should note that the context here is that Master Aryadeva is identifying “dark ignorance” as one of the members of the three poisons; as such, he is talking about misunderstanding which is involved with negative thoughts.  And what he is saying is that—if we hope to reverse this misunderstanding—then we are going to have to come to a realization of the deep import of dependence; that is, of emptiness revealed as the whole point of dependence.


[1151]
‘GREL PA MDZAD PAS KYANG, RNAL ‘BYOR PA YIS BDAG NI ‘GOG PAR BYED, CES BDAG ‘DZIN GYI YUL SUN PHYUNG BA’I TSUL GYIS BDAG MED RTOGS DGOS PAR GSUNGS SO,,

The author of the autocommentary says as well that “deep practitioners must put a stop to the self,” meaning that we need to realize that things have no self-nature, and do so by using the method of debunking the object which our tendency to hold to some self-nature thinks it sees.


[1152]
DE’I PHYIR BDAG ‘DZIN GYI YUL SUN MA PHYUNG BAR DE’I YUL LA YID PHAR ‘GRO BA TSUR BSDUS PA TZAM BYAS KYANG, DES NI BDAG MED LA ZHUGS PAR ‘JOG MI NUS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And so until such time as we can obliterate the object that this tendency thinks it sees, we may simply spend our time reaching out to this object in our mind and then coming back and introspecting about it, but we could never say that this exercise was really engaging in the fact that no such self-nature exists.


[1153]
DE’I RGYU MTSAN NI YID YUL LA ‘JUG PA NA DMIGS PA DE BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA CIG DANG, BDEN MED DU ‘DZIN PA CIG DANG, DE GNYIS GANG GIS KYANG KHYAD PAR DU MA BYAS PAR ‘DZIN PA CIG DANG GSUM YOD PAS,

The reason this is true is that there are three ways in which our mind can engage in its object here.  In the first, we hold what we are focused on as existing in truth.  In the second, we hold that it cannot exist in truth.  And in the third, we don’t make any distinctions about the object in either of these first two ways.


[1154]
BDEN MED DU MA BZUNG YANG BDEN PAR ‘DZIN MI DGOS PA BZHIN DU, BDAG GNYIS LA MA ZHUGS KYANG BDAG MED GNYIS LA ZHUGS MI DGOS TE, BLO PHUNG PO GSUM PA LA GNAS PA MTHA’ YAS PA CIG YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Even if we are not taking an object not to exist in truth, that doesn’t necessarily mean that we are taking it taking it to exist in truth.  Just so, it’s not the case that if our mind is not engaged in either of the two kinds of a self-nature, it must then be engaged in one of the two ways in which these two cannot exist.  And that’s because there are literally infinite cases of the mind residing in some third option.


[1155]
BDAG TU ‘DZIN PA GNYIS KYANG RANG RGYUD KYI STENG DU NGOS BZUNG NAS, RANG GANG LA ‘KHRUL BA’I GZHI DE NYID JI LTAR BZUNG BA LTAR DU MED PAR GTAN LA ‘BAB DGOS KYI,

As for these two versions of holding to some self-nature, we need to learn to identify them within our own heart—and then determine that the thing we ourselves are mistaken about could never exist in the way we believe that it does.


[1156]
DE LTA MIN PAR KHA PHYIR LTA’I DGAG SGRUB NI, RKUN MA NAGS LA SONG BA’I RJES SPANG LA RTZAD GCOD PA DANG ‘DRA BAS GNAD DU MI ‘GRO’O,,

If rather we aim our logic outside of us, we will never hit the mark: it would be like running around in the meadow looking for a thief when he has already slipped into the woods.


[1157]
DE LTAR BDEN ‘DZIN LEGS PAR NGOS ZIN NA, BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS MIN PA’I RTOG PA DU MA CIG YOD PA SHES PAR ‘GYUR BAS, RTOG PAS GANG [f. 90b] BZUNG GI YUL THAMS CAD DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PAS ‘GOG PAR ‘DOD PA’I LOG RTOG THAMS CAD LDOG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If we do a good job in this way of identifying our own tendency to hold to things as real, we will come to realize that we also have a lot of other wrong ideas that are not these two tendencies to hold to some self-nature.  And so once all the objects that we hold on to with our wrong ideas are cancelled by the reasoning which explores suchness, all our mistaken attachments come to a stop as well.


[1158]
‘DI DAG LAS BRTZAMS PA’I BSHAD DGOS PA MANG DU YOD NA’ANG, ‘GA’ ZHIG NI GZHAN MANG POR BSHAD ZIN LA, ‘GA’ ZHIG NI ‘OG TU ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BAS ‘DIR MA SPROS SO,,

Now there are a great many topics that take off from these points and should be treated as well.  Some of these I have covered in many other places, and others I will cover below in this same work.  As such, I will not expand on them here.



Confirming the scriptures,
through reasoning

[1159]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, CHOS KYI BDAG MED RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA DANG, GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA’O,,

This brings us to the second step in our presentation on how we explain the true nature of dependent events—which is confirming the content of these scriptures through reasoning.  This in itself includes two parts: using reasoning to prove that things have no self-nature; and then using reasoning to prove that the person has no self-nature.



Using reasoning to prove
that things have no self-nature

[1160]
DANG PO LA BZHI, MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA BDEN PA GNYIS KAR DGAG PA, DE LTAR BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA, RTEN ‘BYUNG GI SKYE BA NYID KYIS MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI LOG RTOG ‘GOG TSUL, RIGS PAS DPYAD PA BYAS PA’I ‘BRAS BU NGOS GZUNG BA’O,,

The first of these has four parts of its own: denying—with regard to both realities—that things could start in any of four possible ways; refuting debate about this denial; an explanation of how the concept that things start in dependence prevents mistaken ideas where we hold to extremes; and identifying the fruits we derive from having undertaken this logical examination.



All four ways of growing are impossible

[1161]
DANG PO LA GSUM, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA’I DAM BCA’ BZHAG PA, DE RIGS PAS SGRUB PA’I SGRUB BYED BSTAN PA, MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA BKAG PAS GRUB PA’I DON NO,,

The first of these four covers, in turn, three different topics: setting forth our assertion that there is no such thing as something starting through some nature of its own; presenting the proofs which establish this assertion through the use of logic; and finally the point we arrive at, by denying that things could start in any of these four different ways.



Nothing starts through any nature of its own

[1162]
DANG PO NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I MNYAM PA NYID BCU’I NANG NAS RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MAD {%MED} PAR MNYAM PA NYID KHO NA RIGS PAS BSTAN PA NYID KYIS, CHOS MNYAM PA NYID GZHAN RNAMS BSTAN PA SLA BAR DGONGS TE, ‘PHAGS PAS DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS KYI DANG POR,

Here is the first.  Now as we explained before, there are ten different different ways in which things are equivalent.  What the Realized One was thinking is that simply demonstrating, through reasoning, the single one of these ten where all things are established as equivalent in not starting through any nature of their own is easier than presenting the other ways in which things are equivalent.  As such, he put the following verse at the very beginning of his great commentary on the middle way:


	[1163]
,BDAG LAS MA YIN GZHAN LAS MIN,
,GNYIS LAS MA YIN RGYU MED MIN,
,DNGOS PO GANG DAG GANG NA YANG,
,SKYE BA NAM YANG YOD MA YIN,
ZHES NYE BAR BKOD DO,,

Things don’t grow from themselves;
Things don’t grow from something else;

They don’t grow from both,
Or without any causes.

There is nothing in the universe
That ever grows at all.


[1164]
NAM YANG DANG GZHAR YANG NI RNAM GRANGS SO, ,GANG NA YANG ZHES PA’I SGRA, ‘GAR YANG GI SGRA’I RNAM GRANGS GANG DU MI SKYE [f. 91a] BA’I GZHI STON PA RTEN GYI TSIG GIS NI, 

The phrase “ever grows at all” here is another way of saying “can possibly grow.”  The words “nothing in the universe” are another way of saying “nothing in any case”; they are an expression of locus which indicates the place where the not growing occurs.


[1165]
YUL DANG DUS DANG GRUB PA’I MTHA’ BSHAD DO, ,GZHI DE GSUM DU GANG ZHIG MI SKYE BA’I GANG DAG GIS SGRA RTEN PA’I TSIG NI, PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO BRJOD PA’O,,

These last further indicate the place; the time; and the school of philosophy in which things fail to grow.  The term “things” is to indicate what it is that doesn’t grow in these three contexts—what it is that is located in the locus.  What the term refers to is “all outer and inner entities.”


[1166]
DES NA BDAG LAS ZHES SOGS KYI GZHUNG GI DON NI, PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO RNAMS NI YUL DUS GRUB PA’I MTHA’ ‘GAR YANG BDAG LAS SKYE BA SRID PA MA YIN NO, ZHES ‘DI LTAR SBYAR TE BSHAD PAR BYA’O,,

Here then is what the entire first line—ending with “from themselves”—is saying: It is completely impossible for any outer or inner entity to grow from itself, regardless of the place, time, or school of philosophy that we are talking about.  I will present my explanation then based on this reading.


[1167]
DE BZHIN DU DNGOS PO RNAMS NI NAM YANG GZHAN LAS DANG, GNYIS KA LAS DANG RGYU MED LAS SKYE BA SRID PA MA YIN NO, ZHES DAM BCA’ GZHAN GSUM LA YANG SBYAR RO,,

And then we have to read the rest of the lines as expressing three further positions: that—in a similar way—it is impossible for things ever to grow from something else; or from both themselves & something else; or without any cause at all.


[1168]
TSIG GSAL LAS, BDAG LAS DNGOS PO GANG DAG CES BSGYUR YANG ‘GYUR ‘DI LEGS SO,,

In the Clarification of the Verses, the translation of the one section reads “Nothing grows from itself”; but the version we’ve given here is preferable.  


[1169]
YUL GYI DBANG GIS YUL ‘GA’ ZHIG TU GUR KUM MI SKYE BA DANG, DUS KYI DBANG GIS DUS ‘GA’ ZHIG GI TSE LO TOG MI SKYE BA LTA BU YIN NAM SNYAM PA, YUL DUS GANG NA YANG ZHES PAS ‘GOG PAS NAM YANG ZHES SMOS PA DON MED PA MIN NO,,

Now some might think that the not growing here refers to certain places—saying for example that saffron never grows in certain lands; or that it refers to certain times—saying that crops won’t grow in certain seasons.  As such, it is not without meaning that the verse mentions the word “ever,” in order to eliminate every possible place or time.


[1170]
DBU MA PA’I GRUB MTHA’I DBANG GIS MI SKYE YANG, DNGOS POR SMRA BA’I GRUB MTHA’I DBANG GIS SKYE’O SNYAM PA, GRUB MTHA’ GANG NA YANG ZHES PAS ‘GOG PAS, DNGOS POR SMRA BA’I LUGS LA MI SKYE ZHES STON PA MIN NO,,

Others might think that when the verse says that things “don’t grow,” it is only relative to the Middle Way school of philosophy; and that they do grow when we are speaking from the point of view of the Functionalist schools.  This idea is eliminated when the verse indicates “no matter what the school of philosophy”—although this is not meant to say that according to the Functionalist schools nothing grows.


[1171]
RANG ‘GREL LAS ‘DIR MA YIN ZHES BYA BA ‘DI YOD PA NYID KYI SGRUB BYED RANG LAS SKYE BA DANG ‘BREL GYI, YOD PA DANG NI MA YIN TE, DE DGAG PA DON GYIS ‘GRUB PA’I PHYIR RO,

At this point, the autocommentary says:

The words “there is nothing” should be combined with the proof concerning the possibility that there is something; that is, that things could grow from themselves.  And this possibility is in truth not one; which is to say, the denial of this possibility is established, by implication.


[1172]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NI RKANG PA PHYI MA GNYIS KYIS DAM BCA’ DANG, SNGA MA [f. 91b] GNYIS KYIS RTAGS BSTAN PAR ‘CHAD PA LTAR SO SOR MI GCOD PAR, BDAG LAS SKYE BA YOD PA MA YIN, ZHES SBREL BAR BYA ZHES PA STE GZHAN GSUM LA’ANG DE LTAR SBREL LO,,

What this is saying is that the second half of the verse is presenting the assertion, whereas the first half is presenting the reason to prove this assertion.  And as we’ve explained here, we should not divorce these two from each other, but rather combine them: “There is nothing that grows from itself.”  We are to combine the other three possibilities in the same manner.


[1173]
RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA YOD NA DE’I SGRUB BYED DU MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA GANG RUNG KHAS BLANG DGOS PAS YOD PA’I SGRUB BYED CES SMOS SO,,

If there were such a thing as something growing through some nature of its own, then one would have to agree that—as a proof of this fact—the thing would have to grow through one of the four possibilities.  This is why the autocommentary mentions a “proof concerning the possibility that there is something.”


[1174]
MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA KHEGS NA RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA DGAG PA YANG SHUGS KYIS ‘GRUB PAS, DE LTAR SBYAR BA LA RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE MED MI ‘GRUB PA’I SKYON MED PA NI TSIG THA MA’I DON NO,,

Once we disprove that anything could grow in any of the four possible ways, then by implication we have disproven, as well, that anything could grow through some nature of its own.  Once we have made this connection, there is no possible problem that we have failed to prove that nothing can grow through a nature of its own—and this is the point of the closing words of this citation from the autocommentary.


[1175]
DES NA DBU MA SNANG BAR BSHAD PA LTAR MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA BKAG PA RTAGS SU BYAS NAS, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE MED SGRUB PA MI RUNG ZHES PA MIN GYI, SNGAR LTAR SO SOR GCOD PA GZHUNG DE’I DON MIN ZHES PA’O,,

Thus the corresponding reference in Light on the Middle Way is not saying that it would be incorrect to prove that things could never grow through any nature of their own by using, as our reason for this assertion, a denial that things could grow in any of the four possible ways; rather, it is saying—as we’ve mentioned above—that the point of the original scripture is not that we should divorce the two ideas.


[1176]
DNGOS PO RNAMS YUL DUS GRUB PA’I MTHA’ ‘GAR YANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA SRID PA MA YIN, ZHES SBYAR BA DANG,

And then we are to combine the statements so that they come out saying, “No matter what place or time or school you are talking about, it is impossible for things to grow from something other than themselves.”


[1177]
TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG, RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM GYIS KUN RDZOB GRUB PAR KHAS LEN GYI, PHYOGS BZHI KHAS BLANGS PA’I SGO NAS NI MA YIN TE, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PAR SMRA BAR THAL BAR ‘GYUR PA’I PHYIR DANG,

Now the Clarification of the Verses goes on to state—

It is only the fact of conditioned existence that we accept as being deceptive reality; it is not that we believe that it is described by these four possibilities.  Because if that were the case, then we would have to be saying that things did have a nature of their own; and moreover…


[1178]
ZHES GSUNGS PAS GZHAN SKYE NI GSUNG RAB KYI THA SNYAD MIN GYI GRUB MTHA’ SMRA BA’I THA SNYAD YIN LA, DE YANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN LA BSAMS NAS BYAS PAS, DE KHAS BLANGS NA RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PAR SMRA BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR,

As such, we can say that “things growing from something other than themselves” is not a term found in the word of the Buddha, but rather one which is used by followers of particular philosophical schools.  In these people’s minds, the term connotes “things other than themselves which exist by definition.”  As such, anyone who accepts this kind of growing would then be someone who asserted that things had a nature of their own.


[1179]
LUGS ‘DI LA NI GZHAN SKYE THA SNYAD DU YANG MED DO, ,RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS NGO BO THA DAD PAR THA SNYAD DU ‘DOD MOD [f. 92a] KYANG DE TZAM GZHAN SKYE’I DON MIN TE, THA SNYAD DU CHOS RE RES KYANG NGO BO GNYIS GNYIS ‘DZIN PAR GSUNGS PA LTAR NGO BO GRUB PA YOD KYANG, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA’I NGO BOR MI ‘DOD PA BZHIN NO,,

Here in this system, the possibility that things could grow from something other than themselves cannot even in a nominal way be correct.  We do admittedly accept that, in a nominal sense, a cause is not such that to be it would be to be its result.  But this alone is not what is meant by the expression “growing from something other than itself.”  It is said that every existing thing has two types of essential natures; which is to say, even though they do possess a kind of essential nature, we do not accept that this constitutes an essential nature where they would grow through some nature of their own.


[1180]
TSIG GSAL LAS DNGOS PO BDAG LAS SKYE BA MED PA’I DAM BCA’ MED DGAG TU BSHAD PA NI, DAM BCA’ GZHAN GSUM LA YANG ‘DRA BAS, RANG BZHIN MED PAR GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA’I SKABS SU BSGRUB BYA NI DGAG BYA BCAD TZAM GYI MED PAR DGAG PA YIN TE,

The Clarification of the Verses explains that the assertion that things never grow from themselves refers to a negative in the sense of an absence; and this applies as well to the other three assertions here.  As such, the idea we are trying to prove in this context of establishing that things have no nature of their own is a negative in the sense of an absence which consists of the simple exclusion of the thing that emptiness denies. 


[1181]
TSIG GSAL LAS, ,’JIG RTEN DE NA JI SNYED SGRA YOD PA, ,THAMS CAD DNGOS MED CI YANG MED PA ZHES, ,BYA BA LA SOGS PA ‘BYUNG BAS NA, ,MED PAR DGAG PA BRJOD PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR, DNGOS PO MED PA’I DON NI RANG BZHIN MED PA’I DON YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR RO,,

It’s just as the Clarification states in these lines—

We see statements such as:

	All of the sounds
	That ever occur in this world

	Are each of them telling us
	That nothing is real,

	That nothing is there
	At all.

We view these as expressing a negation in the sense of an absence; and so the meaning of saying that “nothing is real” is to say that nothing has any nature of its own.


[1182]
RANG ‘GREL LAS DAM BCA’ BA BZHI PO DE RJES SU BRJED {%BRJOD} NAS RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA, ZHES GSUNGS SHING, ‘OG NAS MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA BKAG PA RTAGS SU BYAS NAS, DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA DANG BRAL BAR GSUNGS PA DANG,

The autocommentary states that “The statement of these four assertions is meant to establish the point through reasoning.”  And further on it gives the denial that things could grow in the four different ways as a reason for saying that every thing that exists is devoid of growing through any nature of its own.


[1183]
TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA BKAG PA’I MTHAR, DE’I PHYIR SKYE BA YOD PA MA YIN NO ZHES BYA BA ‘DI BSGRUB PA YIN LA, ZHES GSUNGS PAS DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA SGRUB PAR MI ‘DOD PA MIN NO,,

And A Clarification of the Verses, after it disproves that things could things could grow in any of the four different ways, says that “Thus we establish the idea that ‘There is no starting at all’.”  Thus it is not the case that we believe that the fact that nothing in the universe grows through any nature of its own is left unproven.


[1184]
TSIG GSAL LAS, RJES SU DPAG PA DAG NI GZHAN GYI DAM BCA’ BA ‘GOG PA TZAM GYI ‘BRAS BU CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA NI SBYOR BA RNAMS [f. 92b] KYIS PHA ROL POS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR DAM BCAS PA ‘GOG PA TZAM DU ZAD KYI, DE LAS GZHAN MI SGRUB PA’I DON YIN GYI BKAG PA TZAM SGRUB PA ‘GOG PA MIN NO,,

The Clarification also says, “This is so because these cases of inference have the result of presenting a position which is a simple denial.”  Which is to say, these syllogisms serve only to disprove the assertion of the other side that things could exist through any nature of their own—they don’t go on to prove anything in addition to that.  Which is not to deny that they do prove a simple absence.


[1185]
DE BZHIN DU, KHO BO CAG ‘DI MED PA DANG YOD PAR MI SGRUB KYI, GZHAN GYIS YOD PAR BTAGS PA DANG MED PAR BTAGS PA ‘GOG STE, MTHA’ GNYIS BSAL NAS DBU MA’I LAM SGRUB PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA YANG PHA ROL POS KHAS BLANGS PA’I YOD MTHA’ DANG, MED MTHA’ GNYIS RNAM PAR GCOD PA TZAM YIN GYI, DE MA GTOGS PA GZHAN MI SGRUB CES PA’I DON NO,,

Likewise these lines are saying: “We for our part are not trying to prove that this doesn’t exist, or that that does exist.  Rather, we are denying what others imagine to exist; and what they imagine does not exist.  What we want to do is eliminate the two extremes, and arrive at the path of the middle way.”  That is, all we are doing is cutting off the two extremes accepted by the other party—that things could exist, or not exist.  We are not trying to go on to make some positive assertion after that.


[1186]
MTHA’ GNYIS BKAG PA TZAM MA BSGRUBS PA YANG MA YIN TE, MTHA’ GNYIS BSAL NAS DBU MA’I LAM SGRUB PAR GSUNGS PAS SO,,

Nor is it the case that not even the simple denial of the two extremes is accomplished here; for the Realized One does in fact eliminate the two extremes, and proceeds to establish the path of the middle way.


[1187]
RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA YANG MIN NA NI PHUNG GSUM MED PAS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA YIN TE, RTZOD ZLOG LAS,

Now if were not the case that things could not exist through any nature of their own, there is no third option: they would have then to exist through such a nature.  Stopping All Argument states the case quite clearly:


	[1188]
,GAL TE RANG BZHIN MED NYID KYIS,
,CI STE RANG BZHIN MED LA BZLOG
,RANG BZHIN MED PA NYID LOG NA,
,RANG BZHIN NYID DU RAB GRUB ‘GYUR,
ZHES GSAL BAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Suppose that the lack
Of any self-nature to things

Were to cancel the lack
Of a self-nature to things,

And this lack of self-nature
Ceased to exist.

In that case then things
Would automatically come
To possess this nature of their own.


[1189]
DE ‘DRA BA’I BSGRUB BYA DANG SGRUB BYED KHAS LEN KYANG RANG RGYUD PAR MI ‘GYUR BA’I RGYU MTSAN NI, RGYAS PAR GZHAN DU YANG YANG BSHAD ZIN PAS MA SPROS SO,,

Even if we were to accept here something which was proven and something that proved it, these would not work in a way that was inherently effective.  The reason for this I have covered in detail over & over in other works—and so I will not expand on it here.


[1190]
‘O NA DGAG PA GNYIS KYI MTSAN NYID JI LTA BU ZHE NA,

One may ask: “How then do you define these two kinds of negation?”


[1191]
SPYIR DGAG PA NI BLOS DGAG BYA DNGOS SU BCAD NAS RTOGS PAR BYA BA YIN PAS, ,RANG MA YIN BCAD PA LTA BU DNGOS PO LA DGAG BYA BCAD PA TZAM DGAG PA MIN LA, CHOS NYID DANG DON DAM BDEN PA LTA BU SGRAS DGAG BYA [f. 93a] DNGOS SU MA BCAD KYANG DE’I DON BLO LA ‘CHAR BA NA, SPROS PA BCAD PA’I RNAM PA CAN DU ‘CHAR BA RNAMS DGAG PA YIN NO,,

Generally speaking, we define a negation as something which is perceived by the mind through the process of excluding, directly, whatever it denies.  Thus it is not a negation when all we do is exclude what’s denied in the sense of excluding everything that a particular thing is not.  In the case though of something like the true nature of things, or ultimate reality, the term itself does not directly exclude what is denied; nonetheless, when the meaning of the term makes itself known to the mind, the mind thinks of things in a way which excludes elaboration—and this process is then a negation.


[1192]
DE LA GNYIS LAS MED DGAG NI BLOS DGAG BYA DNGOS SU BCAD NAS CHOS GZHAN MI ‘PHEN PA’AM MI SGRUB PA YIN TE, DPER NA BRAM ZES CHANG ‘THUNG DU RUNG MI RUNG DRIS PA NA, CHANG MI BTUNG NGO ZHES PA NI CHANG ‘THUNG PA RNAM PAR BCAD PA TZAM ZHIG YIN GYI, DE LAS GZHAN PA’I BTUNG BA BTUNG NGO ZHE ‘AM MI BTUNG NGO ZHES MI SGRUB PA BZHIN NO,,

This process of negation comes in two versions.  In the case of a simple absence, no additional phenomenon is implied, or established, when the mind directly excludes what the negation denies.  Think of the parallel example of when a Brahmin asks whether or not it is alright to drink alcohol; the reply “don’t drink it” is only an exclusion that alcohol should be drunk—it is not at the same time a positive assertion that one should or should not drink something else.


[1193]
MA YIN DGAG NI BLOS DGAG BYA BCAD NAS CHOS GZHAN ‘PHEN PA’AM SGRUB PA YIN TE, DPER NA SKYES BU GCIG DMANGS RIGS SU STON ‘DOD PA NA ‘DI BRAM ZE MA YIN ZHES PA NI, BRAM ZE BKAG PA TZAM MIN GYI BRAM ZE LAS GZHAN PA, DE LAS THOS PA LA SOGS PAS DMAN PA’I DMANGS RIGS YIN PAR SGRUB PA LTA BU’O,,

The other kind of negation is where we deny identity.  In this case, an additional phenomenon is implied, or established, when the mind excludes what the negation denies.  Suppose for example that we want to indicate that a particular person belongs to the class of commoners, and so we say of them, “He or she is not a Brahmin.”  This is not a simple denial that the person is of the Brahmin class; rather, it is also a positive assertion that the person belongs to the commoner class—that he or she is something other than the Brahmin class, and is somehow inferior to them in education or the like.


[1194]
CHOS GZHAN ‘PHEN PA LA DNGOS DANG SHUGS DANG SKABS KYIS ‘PHANGS PA GSUM STE, DANG PO NI, BDAG MED PA YOD CES PA LTA BU STE DGAG BYA GCOD PA DANG, CHOS GZHAN ‘PHEN PA GNYIS KA TSIG GCIG GIS SGRUB PA’O,,

When we say that “some other phenomenon is implied,” there are three different ways in which this implication can occur: directly, by intimation, or from context.  An example of the first would be something like the statement that “There does exist a lack of a self-nature to things.”  In this case, a single phrase serves both to exclude what it denies, and to imply another phenomenon.


[1195]
GNYIS PA NI, MCHOD SBYIN TSON PO NYIN PAR MI ZA BA ZHES PA LTA BU STE DON GYIS BSTAN PA’O,,

The second type can be illustrated by a statement such as, “That chubby fellow, John, never eats during the day”—intimating that something else is the case.


[1196]
DE GNYIS NI DNGOS SHUGS LA ‘PHANGS PA RE RE BA YIN LA, GNYIS KA LDAN PA NI MCHOD SBYIN TSON PO NYIN PAR MI ZA BA RID PA MIN PA YOD CES PA LTA BU’O,,

These two are, respectively, examples of direct implication and implication by intimation.  A case which is both of these at the same time would be a statement such as, “That chubby fellow, John, never eats during the day—and he is certainly not skinny!”


[1197]
GSUM PA NI, SKYES BU ZHIG RGYAL RIGS DANG BRAM ZE GANG RUNG GCIG TU NGES SHING KHYAD PAR MA [f. 93b] NGES PA’I SKABS SU, ‘DI BRAM ZE MA YIN ZHES PA LTA BU RANG GI TSIG GIS MI STON PA STE, SHES RAB SGRON MA’I ‘GREL BSHAD DU DRANGS PA LAS,

An example of the third would be a case where we knew that a person had to belong either to the class of royalty or to the Brahmin class, but we weren’t sure which of the two they were.  In this instance, someone else telling us that “He or she is not a Brahmin” would not indicate, in the wording taken by itself, which one they were.  We see for example the following lines quoted in the explication of the Lamp on Wisdom:


	[1198]
,DGAG PA DON GYIS BSTAN PA DANG,
,TSIG GCIG SGRUB PAR BYED PA DANG,
,DE LDAN RANG TSIG MI STON PA,
,MA YIN GZHAN PA GZHAN YIN NO,
ZHES SO,,

A negation can imply
Something else by intimation;

A single phrase can also
Function to assert;
Both; or be insufficient,
In the wording alone,
To do the indicating.

This then is the other kind,
Where we deny
Some other identity.


[1199]
KHA CIG GZHI SGRUB PA DANG TSOGS NA MED DGAG MIN PAR SMRA BA MI ‘THAD DE, BRAM ZE SGRUB PA YIN PAS BRAM ZES CHANG MI ‘THUNG BA DGAG BYA BCAD TZAM YIN PA MI ‘GOG PA’I PHYIR TE, DPER NA SGRA MNGON GYUR YIN PAS SGRA MI RTAG PA LKOG GYUR YIN PA MI ‘GOG PA BZHIN NO,,

Some say that it is incorrect to mention a negation which is not the absence of something in the same phrase with something that does in fact exist.  A Brahmin for example is a positive entity, and so when you say “Brahmins don’t drink alcohol,” you are not denying something in the sense of simply excluding what you mean to deny.  Saying that sound exists at the manifest level of reality doesn’t deny, for example, that the fact that sound is a changing thing exists at the recondite level of existence.


[1200]
GZHAN DAG GZHI DANG TSOGS NA CHOS GZHAN ‘PHANGS SO ZHES PA YANG MI ‘THAD DE, BRAM ZE LTA BU NI CHOS GZHAN ‘PHEN MI ‘PHEN RTZI BA’I GZHI YIN GYI, ‘PHANGS PA’I CHOS GZHAN MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Still others say that a negation in conjunction with what it applies to is the other phenomenon implied—but this is also incorrect.  Someone like the Brahmin here is what we are checking to see if some other phenomenon is implied, or not; but they do not themselves constitute the other phenomenon which is implied.



Four denials of the Realized One

	[1201]
	[VI.8]
Tebhyas ta eva na bhavanti kutaḥ parebhyo
dvābhyāṃ na cāpi kuta eva vinaiva hetum,
Tasmād dhi tasya bhavane na guṇo’sti kaścij
jātasya janma punar eva ca naiva yuktam.


	[VI.8a]
,DE NYID DE LAS ‘BYUNG MIN GZHAN DAG LAS
LTA GA LA ZHIG ,
,GNYI GA LAS KYANG MA YIN RGYU MED PAR
NI GA LA YOD,

This cannot occur through that—
And how could it occur
Through something other?

Nor could it through both.
How as well could it occur
Without a cause at all?


[1202]
DE LTAR ‘PHAGS PA’I DAM BCA’ GZHI ‘DIR BKOD PA NI, ‘BRAS BU DE NYID DE’I NGO BO NYID LAS ‘BYUNG BA MIN PA DANG, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I RGYU GZHAN DAG LAS LTA ‘BYUNG BA GA LA ZHIG STE DE MED PA DANG, RANG GZHAN GNYIS KA LAS KYANG ‘BYUNG BA MA YIN PA DANG, RGYU MED PAR NI ‘BYUNG BA GA LA YOD DE MED DO,,

And so the assertion that the Realized One is setting forth at this point is that this result cannot occur through “that”—through some essential nature of its own.  And how could it occur (meaning, it could never occur) through something other than itself which also existed by definition?  Nor could the result occur through both itself and something other than it.  How as well could it occur (meaning, it could never occur) without a cause at all?


[1203]
DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YOD NA MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA GANG RUNG GIS KHYAB STE, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA LA RGYU YOD MED GNYIS SU KHA TSON CHOD CING, RGYU YOD PA LA RANG GZHAN RE RE BA DANG GNYIS KA TSOGS PA LAS SKYE BA GSUM DU KHA TSON CHOD PAS DAM BCA’ BZHIS CHOG GO ,,

And if there were such a thing as something existing through some nature of its own, then it would necessarily have to grow in one of these four ways.  This is because for a thing to grow through some nature of its own, it would either have to have a cause, or have no cause: there are only two choices.  And if it did have a cause, then that cause would have either to be the thing itself, or something other than the thing itself; or else both of these two options together—there are only these three choices.  As such, a total of four assertions is sufficient to make the point.



Nothing grows in either reality

[1204]
GNYIS PA LA BZHI, BDAG SKYE DGAG PA, GZHAN [f. 94a] SKYE DGAG PA, GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA DGAG PA, RGYU MED PAR SKYE BA DGAG PA’O,,

This brings us to the second step in denying—with regard to both realities—that things could start in any of the four possible ways.  This is presenting the proofs which establish, through the use of logic, the assertion that there is no such thing as something starting through some nature of its own.  We proceed in four steps: denying that things could grow from themselves; that they could grow from something other than themselves; that they could grow through both; and that they could grow without any cause at all.



Nothing grows from itself

[1205]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, ‘GREL PA MDZAD PA’I RIGS PAS DGAG PA, RTZA BA SHES RAB KYI RIGS PAS DGAG PA’O,,

We will discuss the first of these in two parts of its own: accomplishing the denial by using the logic employed by the author of the autocommentary; and then by using the logic employed in Wisdom.



Chandrakirti’s logic against
things growing from themselves

[1206]
DANG PO LA GSUM, DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR ‘DOD PA’I GRUB MTHA’ MKHAN GYI LUGS DGAG PA, GRUB MTHAS BLO MA BSGYUR BA’I THA SNYAD DU YANG MED PAR BSTAN PA, DE LTAR BKAG PA RNAMS KYI DON BSDU BA’O,,

The first of these, in turn, comes in three sections: denying the system of those who believe they have perceived some actual nature; demonstrating that things could not be said to grow from themselves even in the parlance of those who have not been influenced by any particular school of philosophy; and finally a summary of these denials.



Denying ideas of those who think
they perceive some actual nature

[1207]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, RANG DANG NGO BO GCIG PA’I RGYU LAS SKYE BA DGAG PA, RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GNYIS NGO BO GCIG PA DGAG PA’O,,

Again, the first of these three comes in two further steps: a denial that something could grow from a cause which was such that to be that cause was to be what had grown from it; and a denial that a cause could at any rate be such that to be it were to be its result.



Denying causes that are their results

[1208]
DANG PO LA GSUM, NGO BO GCIG PA’I RGYU LAS SKYE NA DON MED DU THAL BA DANG, NGO BO GCIG PA LAS SKYE NA RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL BA DANG, DE DAG GI NYES SPONG GI LAN DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Once more, the first of these will be covered in three sections of its own: a demonstration that it would be meaningless for a result to grow from a cause that was such that to be the cause were to be the result; explaining that it would contradict logic if a result were to grow from a cause that were such that to be the cause were to be the result; and then refuting replies which attempt to deny these problems.  Here is the first of these.


[1209]
DNGOS PO RNAMS BDAG LAS MI SKYE BA ‘DI RGYU MTSAN GANG LAS NGES SHE NA,

One may ask: “What reason for it can help us grasp the idea that things cannot grow from themselves?”



The pointlessness of self-existence

	[1210]
[VI.8b]
,DE NI DE LAS ‘BYUNG NA YON TAN ‘GA’ YANG
YOD MA YIN,

There would be no additional
Point at all served to this,
If it were to occur through that.


[1211]
SKYE BZHIN PA SKYE BA’I BYA BA’I BYED PA PO MYU GU DE NI, DE’I RANG GI NGO BO LAS BYUNG NA DE LTAR ‘BYUNG BA LA ‘BYUNG DGOS PA’I YON TAN LHAG PO ‘GA’ YANG YOD PA MA YIN TE, MYU GU’I RANG GI NGO BO YOD PA NYID SNGAR RGYU’I DUS NAS THOB ZIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Let’s look at this sprout, as it grows: the sprout which is the agent of the action of growing.  If it were to occur through some essential nature of its own, then there would be no additional point at all served—there would be no need satisfied—by its occurring in this particular way.  This is because the sprout’s having its own nature would have come about already, earlier—at the time of its cause.


[1212]
‘DI LA GRANGS CAN PA RNAMS RGYU RKYEN PHAN TSUN SO SO THA DAD PA RNAMS LA ‘BRAS BU THUN MONG BA GCIG NI YOD LA, DE YANG RGYU RKYEN RNAMS LA RANG BZHIN GCIG PA’I GTZO BO GCIG RJES SU ‘GRO BA MED NA MI RUNG BAS, RGYU NAS KYI RANG BZHIN GANG YIN PA YANG, RKYEN CHU LUD SOGS KYI RANG BZHIN YIN LA,

Now the followers of the Numerist School say that a single, shared result comes from causes & conditions which are distinct from one another.  They assert that it would be wrong to say that these causes & conditions did not follow upon a single primal cause; thus the nature of the cause—say, a grain of barley—must be the nature of the conditions, things like the water and the fertilizer.


[1213]
DE BZHIN DU MYU GU’I RANG BZHIN DANG DE’I RGYU RKYEN GYI RANG BZHIN RNAMS PHAR YIN TSUR YIN DU [f. 94b] ‘DOD DE, RNAM ‘GYUR THAMS CAD KYI RANG BZHIN RNAMS DE LTAR DU ‘DOD DO,,

They believe similarly that the nature of the result would have to be the nature of both the causes & conditions, and vice versa—for this is what they believe about the nature of every individual manifestation.


[1214]
DE’I PHYIR SA MYUG PHAN TSUN THA DAD PA KHO NAR ‘DOD PAS MYU GU MYU GU LAS SKYE BAR MI ‘DOD KYANG, MYU GU NI SA BON DANG DE’I RANG BZHIN LAS SKYE BAR SMRA BA NA, RANG BZHIN GNYIS GCIG YIN PAS RANG GI RANG BZHIN LAS KYANG SKYE BA DANG MYU GU MI GSAL BA RGYU DUS NA YOD PA SKYE BA NI BDAG SKYE’I ‘DOD TSUL LO,,

As such they would say that the seed and the sprout can only be distinct from one another—and they would not agree that the sprout had grown from the sprout.  Nonetheless, if you do say that the sprout grows from the seed and from its nature, then since the two natures are one, you would have to say that the sprout had grown from its own nature; and that what grows is a sprout that existed at the time of its cause, but in a way which wasn’t manifest.  This is the way then in which they believe that when something grows, it grows from itself.


[1215]
GRANGS CAN GYI KHYAD PAR ‘GA’ ZHIG NI SKYE BAR MI SMRA BAR RGYU LAS SNGAR MI GSAL BA PHYIS GSAL BAR ‘DOD MOD KYANG DON ‘DRA’O,,

It is admittedly the case that there are some kinds of Numerists who don’t speak of something growing; rather, they phrase it as something manifesting from its cause which wasn’t manifest earlier.  But this amounts to the same thing as the other.


[1216]
‘DIS SPYI GSAL NGO BO GCIG TU ‘DOD PA YANG DE LTAR YIN GYI, SANGS RGYAS PAS DNGOS PO DANG BUM PA NGO BO GCIG TU ‘DOD PA DANG GTAN MI ‘DRA’O,,

This by the way describes the belief of this school that to be the particular is to be the general; but this is entirely different from the way in which the Buddhists would say that to be a water pitcher is to be a functioning thing.


[1217]
DE LTAR MYU GU’I NGO BO’AM RANG BZHIN GANG YIN THAMS CAD SA BON GYI DUS SU YOD NA, MYU GU’I NGO BO LAS DON GZHAN PA’I MYU GU GSAL BA NYID KYANG MI SRID PAS RGYU DUS NAS MYU GU’I RANG BZHIN NAM NGO BOR MA ZAD, MYU GU NYID KYANG YOD DGOS PAS, DE’I TSE DE GRUB PA’I ‘OG TU SLAR YANG SKYE BA LA DON GTAN MED DO,,

Thus we can say that—if every form of some essence or nature which the sprout possesses is present at the same time as the seed—then it is impossible for there to be any particular of a sprout which is a different entity from the essential nature of the sprout.  Not only that, but since the sprout itself must also be present already, then at that point—when it has already come into being—there is absolutely no point to its growing once again, after that time.



Things grown need not grow again

	[1218]
[VI.9]
Jātasya janmani punaḥ parikalpyamāne,
naivāṅkurādaya iha prabhavaṃ labheran.
Bījasya ca prabhava eva bhaved bhavāntaṃ,
tenaiva tasya hi kathaṃ ca bhaved vināśaḥ.

[VI.8c-VI.9a]
,SKYES PAR GYUR PA SLAR YANG SKYE BAR
RIGS PA’ANG MA YIN NYID,
,SKYES ZIN SLAR YANG SKYE BAR YONGS SU
RTOG PAR ‘GYUR NA NI,
,MYU GU LA SOGS RNAMS KYI SKYE BA
‘DIR RNYED MI ‘GYUR ZHING,

		If something had already grown,
		It would as well be totally illogical
		For it to grow once more.

		And suppose you fantasize
		That something already grown
		Could ever grow again;

		It would then be the case
That we could never observe
		Sprouts & such growing here.
				


[1219]
GNYIS PA NI, SKYES ZIN PAR GYUR PA SLAR YANG STE SKYES ZIN PA’I ‘OG TU LDABS NAS, SKYE BAR RIGS PA MA YIN PA NYID DO,,

Here is the second section from above: explaining that it would contradict logic if a result were to grow from a cause that were such that to be the cause were to be the result.  If something had already grown, then it would be totally illogical for it to be planted, and to grow, once more—that is, after the point that it had already grown.


[1220]
‘ANG GI SGRAS NI RANG GI RANG BZHIN LAS SKYE NA DON MED DU ‘GYUR BAR MA ZAD PA’O,,

The words “as well” are meant to say, “not only would it be pointless for something to grow from its own self-nature…”


[1221]
GAL TE GSAL BA’I PHYOGS ‘DZIN NA’ANG ‘BRAS BU GSAL BA RGYU DUS NAS YOD NA NI KHAS BLANGS DANG ‘GAL LA, MED NA NI ‘BRAS BU’I GSAL BA DANG DE’I RANG BZHIN GNYIS GCIG THA DAD DPYAD LA DGAG GO

Even if we were to consider this from the point of view of being the particular of a general, it would be a contradiction of what one has accepted to say that a result which was a particular could be present starting from the time of the cause.  And if it were not present, then that would prevent us from examining the question of whether the result as a particular, and its self-nature, were the same thing or separate things.


[1222]
,BDAG SKYE RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL ZHES PA DAM [f. 95a] BCA’ TZAM DU ZAD PAS DE ‘GOG PA’I RIGS PA STON PA NI,

Even if all we do is to assert that something growing from itself would contradict logic, we should present the particular logic which denies this idea.


[1223]
SKYES ZIN PA’I SA BON SLAR YANG LDABS NAS SKYE BAR YONGS SU RTOG PAR ‘GYUR BA STE ‘DOD NA NI, RGYU MTSAN GANG GIS SA BON LDABS NAS SKYE BA BKAG NAS, MYU GU SKYE BAR ‘DOD PA SLAR YANG SA BON DE SKYE BA LA GEGS CI ZHIG YOD DE MED PAS, MYU GU DANG LA SOGS PAS SDONG BU DANG SBUBS ‘CHA’ BA SOGS KYI SKYE BA ‘JIG RTEN ‘DIR GTAN RNYED PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

And so suppose that you fantasize (which is to say, believe) that we take a seed which has already grown, and plant it again, and then it grows.  What reason could you ever give then for saying that—once you had planted a seed, and it had grown and then stopped, and then from that the sprout had grown (all according to you)—the seed was prevented from growing once more?  There could in fact be no such reason.  And as such, it would then have to be the case, in the whole world here, that we could never observe, at all, instances where sprouts & such (which is meant to include things like the trunks of trees, and the channels inside them) ever grew.



Things would grow themselves forever

	[1224]
[VI.9b]
,SA BON SRID MTHAR THUG PAR RAB TU
SKYE BA NYID DU ‘GYUR,

The seed could only
Continue to grow,

Until the very end
Of the universe.


[1225]
SKYON GZHAN YANG SA BON DE NYID BAR MA CHAD PAR SRID PA’I MTHAR THUG PAR RAB TU SKYE BA NYID DU ‘GYUR TE, SKYES ZIN PA DE NYID SLAR YANG SKYE DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And there is yet another problem: That same seed could only continue to grow, without interruption, until the very end of the universe.  Because there was some need for something that had already grown to grown once more.


[1226]
DE NI ‘BRAS BU’I RIGS ‘DRA RNAMS MI SKYE BA DANG, RGYU’I RIGS ‘DRA RNAMS BAR MA CHAD DU SKYE BA’I SKYON GNYIS BSTAN NAS RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL BA BRJOD PA’O,,

These sections express contradiction by demonstrating two problems with the proposed ideas: how results of the same type could never grow at all; and how causes of the same type would have to grow without interruption.



A thing cannot act to destroy itself

	[1227]
[VI.9c]
,JI LTAR DE NYID KYIS DE [f. 204b] RNAM PAR ‘JIG PAR
BYED PAR ‘GYUR,

How could the presence
Of the one ever act [f. 204b]
To destroy the other?


[1228]
GSUM PA NI, CI STE MYU GU SKYE BA LE PHAN ‘DOGS PA’I RKYEN CHU DANG, DPYID KYI DUS LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYIS NI, SA BON SBANG RO LTA BUR RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA BYED CING, MYU GU SKYED PAR BYED LA,

Here is the third section from above, refuting replies which attempt to deny these problems.  So suppose someone thinks the following:

Now let’s consider what happens when a sprout grows.  Conditions which contribute to this growth—things like water, or spring having arrived—bring about a change in the seed, in the way that malt is changed during the process of fermentation.  And then it produces the sprout.


[1229]
MYU GU YANG RANG SKYED PA PO SA BON DANG LHAN CIG TU GNAS PAR ‘GAL BA’I PHYIR, SA BON ‘GAG PAR BYED CING ‘BYUNG BAS RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL BA’I SKYON GNYIS SMRAS PA’I NYES PA’I SKABS MED LA,

And it’s a contradiction to say that the sprout could be there at the same time as the seed which produced it.  Therefore the seed is put to a stop and then the thing occurs; there is no possible place here for the problems that you raised when you criticized our view by pointing out two kinds of contradiction.


[1230]
SA MYUG KYANG RANG BZHIN NAM NGO BO GZHAN MA YIN PAS BDAG LAS MI SKYE BA YANG MA YIN NO SNYAM NA,

And since the seed and the sprout are not such that to be one is not to be the other, in their nature or essence, then it’s further not the case that the sprout has not grown from itself.


[1231]
‘DI YANG MI RUNG STE GANG GI PHYIR SA MYUG GNYIS KYI RANG BZHIN GNYIS RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU GCIG YIN PAS [f. 95b] JI LTAR NA MYU GU DE NYID KYIS SA BON DE RNAM PAR ‘JIG PAR BYED PAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR TE, MYU GUS MYU GU ‘JIG PAR MI BYED PA BZHIN NO SNYAM DU BSAMS SO,,

That too though is a mistaken idea.  The reason is that—if the two natures of the two things, the seed & the sprout, were in every aspect the same—then how could the presence of the one (the sprout) ever act to destroy the other, the seed?  In fact, it could never do so, for in our opinion, to our way of thinking, it would be as though the sprout had destroyed the sprout itself.


[1232]
‘DI ‘DRA BA’I GNOD PA MTHONG YANG MI LDOG PA NI, MYU GUS SA BON ‘JIG PA NI RNAM ‘GYUR GYI STENG NAS YIN PAS, RANG GIS RANG ‘JIG PA DANG GA NA ‘DRA SNYAM DU RGOL BA BLUN PAS YIN LA, NGO BO’AM RANG BZHIN THAMS CAD PHAR YIN TSUR YIN DU SONG NA RNAM ‘GYUR SO SOR YANG MI ‘GRUB PAS GNOD PA SPANG MI NUS SO,,

The opponent here can see this kind of problem coming up, and refuses to change their position, saying that when the sprout destroys the seed it happens only at the level of the manifestation—and thus there’s no way that it’s as if the sprout had destroyed itself.  This kind of thinking though is foolish, for it cannot avoid the problem that—if all the essences or natures are such that to be one is to be the other, and vice versa—then you could never say on top of that that the manifestations were different from each other.



Seed & sprout all the same

[1233]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, SA MYUG GNYIS LA DBYIBS SOGS THA DAD MED PAR THAL BAS DGAG ,DE’I NYES SPONG GI LAN DGAG ,GNAS SKABS GNYIS KYI RE RER GNYIS KA ‘DZIN MI ‘DZIN MTSUNGS PAR THAL BAS DGAG PA’O,,

This brings us to our second major section from above: a denial that a cause could at any rate be such that to be it were to be its result.  This explanation will be made in three steps: denying such a possibility by showing how the pair of the seed & the sprout could then never have different shapes, and so on; countering a response which attempts to avoid this problem; and then finally denying this possibility by showing how it would then have to be the same whether we held or didn’t hold to both the seed and sprout, as individual entities at two separate stages.


	[1234]
	[VI.10]
Saṃsthāna varṇa rasa vīrya vipāka bhedāḥ
syur nāṅkurasya tava kāraṇato vibhinnāḥ,
Prāgātma bhāvam avadhūya tad anya rūpam
āpadyate yadi tadāsya kathaṃ hi tattvam.

	[VI.10a]
,BYED RGYU SA BON GYI LAS THA DAD MYU GU’I
DBYIBS DANG NI,
,KHA DOG RO NUS SMIN PA’I THA DAD KHYOD LA
MED PAR ‘GYUR,

		According to you, the sprout
		Could have no shape, or color,
		Or taste or properties,

		Or ripening that was different
		From that of the seed
		Which had given it birth.


[1235]
DANG PO NI, SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE MYU GU SKYED PAR BYED PA’I RGYU SA BON GYI KHA DOG DANG DBYIBS LA SOGS PA LAS THA DAD PA’I MYU GU’I RING THUNG SOGS KYI DBYIBS DANG, SNGO SER SOGS KYI KHA DOG DANG, MNGAR SKYUR SOGS KYI RO DANG NUS MTHU DANG, SMIN PA RNAMS KYI THA DAD PA KHYOD LA MED PAR ‘GYUR TE, SA MYUG GNYIS KYI NGO BO DANG RANG BZHIN LA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU KHYAD PAR MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here is the first.  There is yet another problem with saying that to be the seed is to be the sprout.  If that were the case, then the sprout could have no qualities (color, shape, and so on) that were different from those of the seed which had given it birth.  That is, the sprout would never possess a different shape—its length, or whatever; or color—whether it be green, yellow, or whatever; or taste—sweetness or sourness and such; or particular functional properties; or a particular manner of ripening.  And that’s because, according to you, there is no difference of any kind between the essence, and the nature, of this pair: the seed & the sprout.


[1236]
DE LTAR THAL BA LAS THA MI DAD PAR DMIGS PA YANG MA YIN PA’I PHYIR, DE GNYIS GYI NGO BO KUN NAS GCIG PA YANG MA YIN NO ZHES BZLOG PA ‘PHEN PA MDZAD DE, BZLOG PA ‘PHEN PA DANG BZLOG PA RANG RGYUD ‘PHEN PA LA KHYAD PAR SHIN TU CHE’O,,

And if this absurd consequence held true, then we could never observe the seed & the sprout displaying anything but qualities that weren’t different.  The statement of absurdity thus implies the denial, which states: “And so neither can we say that these two are such that to be one is to be, in every shape & manner, the other.”  There is a massive difference then between such a statement implying a denial, and a denial implying a statement of principle.


[1237]
DE LA NUS MTHU NI GZHANG ‘BRUM GYI SMAN LUS DANG NYE BA TZAM GYIS NAD DE SEL BA [f. 96a] DANG, RTZI SMAN SOGS ‘GA’ ZHIG BCANGS PA TZAM GYIS NAM MKHA’ LA ‘GRO BA LTA BU’O,,

When we say “functional properties” here, what we’re talking about is where the plant, for example, is a medicinal herb for treating ailments such as a hemorrhoid: it has the ability to cure the problem just by being being applied closely to the body.  Another example is where—if we simply hold certain elixir herbs or such in our hand, we are able to fly in the sky.


[1238]
RNAM PAR SMIN PA NI RKYEN MI ‘DRA BA LAS RDZAS KYI KHYAD PAR ‘GYUR BA STE, DPER NA ‘O MAS BCUS PA SOGS LAS SKYU RU RA DANG, PI PI LING SOGS LA RO MNGAR POR ‘GYUR BA LTA BU’O,,

When we say here “a particular manner of ripening,” we’re referring to a case where—if the plant receives different treatments—then it takes on a particular quality.  An example would be where we apply milk to myrobalan or peppercorns or the like, and their taste changes to sweetness.



Not stages of a single thing

	[1239]
	[VI.10b]
,GAL TE SNGAR GYI BDAG GIS DNGOS PO BSAL NAS
DE LAS GZHAN,
,NGO BOR ‘GYUR NA DE TSE DE YI DE NYID
JI LTAR ‘GYUR,

Suppose the self-nature
In the previous one fades away,

And transforms into
The essence of the other—

And at that point,
Its is that very one.

But how could that be?


[1240]
GNYIS PA NI, CI STE SA BON GYI GNAS SKABS BTANG NAS MYU GU’I GNAS SKABS GZHAN DU GYUR PAS, SA MYUG GNYIS GNAS SKABS THA DAD PA TZAM YIN PA’I PHYIR SA BON DE NYID MYU GUR ‘GYUR BA YIN NO ZHE NA,

Which brings us to our second step here: countering a response which attempts to avoid the problem we’ve described.  Here, someone comes and makes this claim:

The way it works is that an entity releases the stage of being a seed, and then enters another stage, of being a sprout.  These two—the seed & the sprout—are thus but different stages of the same thing; as such, what really happens is that the seed itself manifests as the sprout.


[1241]
GAL TE SNGAR GYI SA BON GYI BDAG GI DNGOS PO’I GNAS SKABS BSAL NAS, GNAS SKABS DE LAS GZHAN MYU GU’I GNAS SKABS KYI NGO BOR ‘GYUR NA, DE LTAR ‘DOD PA DE’I TSE SA BON DE YI RANG BZHIN NYID MYU GU’I RANG BZHIN DE NYID YIN ZHES

Now suppose the self-nature at the previous stage—the time of the seed—fades away, and transforms into the essence of the “other” stage: the stage of the sprout.  And suppose you assert that, at that point, its (the seed’s) essential nature is none other than the very nature of the sprout.


[1242]
JI LTAR RIGS PAR ‘GYUR TE, DE’I GNAS SKABS KYI DNGOS PO DE NYID DE’I DNGOS PO NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, DE’I NGO BO LAS DON GZHAN PA’I DE’I DNGOS PO MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

But how could that be the correct?  Because the the precise entity of that stage is that very entity; and there is no other entity which is not such that to be that entity is to be it.


[1243]
DES NA SA MYUG ‘DI GNYIS KYI NGO BO RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU THA MI DAD PA NYID NYAMS PA YIN NO,,

And in that case you’d lose the idea that the essential natures of both the seed & the sprout were, in every possible respect, inseparable.


[1244]
CI STE SA MYUG GI DBYIBS LA SOGS PA THA DAD KYANG, RDZAS THA MI DAD PAS MI ‘GAL LO SNYAM NA,

And suppose you think to yourself, “But what if we say that—even though the shape and so forth of seed & the sprout are different—the two are not such that to be one is not to be the other.  In that case, there would be no contradiction.”


[1245]
DE NI MI RIGS TE DBYIBS LA SOGS PA MA BZUNG NA SA MYUG GI RDZAS KYANG MI ‘DZIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And yet that line of thinking is incorrect: without holding to qualities such as their shape & such, there is no way that we can hold to the very substance of the seed or sprout.



Held or not held, together

	[1246]
	[VI.11]
Bījād ananya iha te yadi cāṅkuraḥ syād
gṛhyeta naiva hi sa bījam ivāṅkurākhyaḥ,
Gṛhyeta vā tad api nāma yathāṅkuro’yaṃ
tattvāt tayor iti na caitad ato’bhyupeyam.

,GAL TE KHYOD KYI SA BON MYU GU ‘DIR GZHAN
MA YIN NA,
,SA BON BZHIN DU MYU GU ZHES BYA
DE GZUNG MED PA’AM,
,YANG NA DE DAG GCIG PAS JI LTAR MYU GU
‘DI BZHIN DU,
,DE YANG GZUNG DU YOD ‘GYUR DE PHYIR ‘DI NI
KHAS MI BLANG,

		Suppose that, as you put it,
		The seed & the sprout here
		Were not not the other.

		Then just as the seed,
		Neither could the sprout
		Be something that we held.

		Or else we could also say that,
		Since these two are the same,
		Then just as the sprout
Is something that is held,

The other too would have to be—
And so we refuse to accept this idea.			
	

[1247]
GSUM PA NI, SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE GAL TE KHYOD KYI LTAR SA BON DANG MYU GU’I NGO BO GNYIS LA ‘JIG RTEN ‘DIR NGO BO GZHAN PA YOD PA MA YIN NA, JI LTAR MYU GU’I GNAS SKABS SU SA BON GZUNG DU MED PA DE BZHIN DU, MYU [f. 96b] GU YANG GZUNG DU MED PAR ‘GYUR TE,

We have reached then our third step: denying this possibility by showing how it would then have to be the same whether we held or didn’t hold to both the seed & the sprout, as individual entities at two separate stages.  And so there is another problem with your position.  Suppose it were true that, as you put it, the essential nature of these two—the seed & sprout—were not, here in the world, such that to be one was not to be the other.  We can in general observe that, at the sprout stage, the seed can no longer be held by our perceptions; and just in that same way, in your model, neither could the sprout at that point be something that our perceptions held.


[1248]
‘AM ZHES PA YANG NA SA MYUG DE DAG GI NGO BO RNAM PA KUN TU GCIG PAS JI LTAR MYU GU’I GNAS SKABS SU, MYU GU ‘DI GZUNG DU YOD PA DE BZHIN DU, SA BON DE YANG DBANG PO’I SHES PAS GZUNG DU YOD PAR ‘GYUR BA LAS,

The expression “or else” here is meant to convey, “we could also say”: that since the essential nature of these two—the seed & the sprout—is supposed to be in every respect the same, then just as the sprout is something that is held by our perceptions during the period of the sprout, then the other too—the seed—would have as well to be something that could be held, at that same point, by our perceptions, in the form of our awareness of our senses.


[1249]
MED PA DE’I PHYIR NYES PA DE GNYIS SPONG BAR ‘DOD PAS, SA MYUG GNYIS KYI NGO BO LA GZHAN MED PA ‘DI NI KHAS BLANG BAR MI BYA’O,,

But the fact is that, rather, the seed is not something held at this point; and so—desirous of avoiding these two problems—we refuse to accept this idea that the seed & sprout are not such that when something is one it cannot be the other.


[1250]
RIGS PA DE RNAMS LEGS PAR RTOGS NA CHOS CAN THAMS CAD PHAN TSUN DU NGO BO THA DAD PA LA, DE RNAMS KYI CHOS NYID THAMS CAD PHAR YIN TSUR YIN GYI GCIG TU ‘DOD PA DANG, GNAS SKABS SNGA MA’I DUS KYI CHOS NYID DE NYID GNAS SKABS PHYI MA’I DUS KYI CHOS NYID DE NYID DU ‘DOD PA’I LOG RTOG THAMS CAD LDOG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If a person is able to grasp this line of reasoning well, they avoid a pair of misconceptions which say that—starting from the point of particular objects not being such that to be one were to be the other—each & every example of the true nature of these objects is one, in the sense that to be one is to be the other; or that the true nature of an object at an earlier stage is precisely the same true nature of the same object at a later stage.



Cause & effect in the everyday world

[1251]
GNYIS PA NI, DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR ‘DOD PA’I GRANGS CAN GYI LUGS, SANGS RGYAS PA’I LUGS LAS GZHAN DU BRTAGS PA’I BDAG SKYE BKAG NAS, GRUB MTHA’I LUGS GZHAN DU BLO MA SBYANGS PA’I ‘JIG RTEN PA’I THA SNYAD DU YANG, BDAG LAS SKYE BAR RTOG PA ‘DI MI ‘THAD DO ZHES STON PA NI,

This brings us to the second point from above: demonstrating that things could not be said to grow from themselves even in the parlance of those who have not been influenced by any particular school of philosophy.  And so we have denied, as explained, the system of the Numerists, who believe they have realized the true nature of things; and yet it is nothing but what the Buddhists would describe as things coming from themselves: nothing but a figment of these other thinkers’ minds.  Here next then we describe how—even in the language of the everyday world, among people who have had no training in any specific school of thought—this idea that things could grow from themselves is an incorrect one.  The root text covers it in these lines:


	[1252]
	[VI.12]
Loko’pi caikyam anayor iti nābhyupaiti
naṣṭe’pi paśyati yataḥ phalam eṣa hetau,
Tasmān na tattvata idaṃ na ca lokataś ca
yuktaṃ svato bhavati bhāva iti prakalpam.

	[VI.12a]
,GANG PHYIR RGYU ZHIG NA YANG DE YI ‘BRAS BU 
MTHONG BA’I PHYIR,
,DE DAG GCIG PA YIN ZHES ‘JIG RTEN GYIS KYANG
KHAS MA LEN,

		Not even in the everyday world
		Would people accept the idea
		That they were one & the same.

		This is because,
		Even if the cause ends,
		Its result can still be observed.


[1253]
GANG GI PHYIR RGYU SA BON ZHIG NA’ANG SA BON DE YI ‘BRAS BU MTHONG BA’I PHYIR, SA MYUG DE DAG NGO BO GCIG PA YIN ZHES ‘JIG RTEN GYIS KYANG KHAS MI LEN NO,,

Not even in the everyday world would people accept the idea that they—the seed and the sprout—were one & the same: that to be one was to be the other.  This is because, even if the cause—the seed—ends, its (the seed’s) result can still be observed.



Nothing but a fanciful idea

	[1254]
[VI.12b]
,DE PHYIR DNGOS PO BDAG LAS ‘BYUNG ZHES RAB TU
BRTAGS PA ‘DI,
,DE NYID DANG NI ‘JIG RTEN DU YANG RIGS PA
MA YIN NO,

		Thus it is that
		The fanciful idea
		That objects grow from themselves

		Is illogical, both in the way
		Things are, and in
		The everyday world as well.


[1255]
GSUM PA NI, GANG GI PHYIR DON DAM PA DANG ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB KYI PHYOGS GNYIS KA LTAR YANG BDAG LAS SKYE BA RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL BA DE’I PHYIR, PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO RNAMS BDAG LAS ‘BYUNG BA YIN ZHES RAB TU BRTAGS PA ‘DI, ,DE NYID [f. 97a] DON DAM DANG NI ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB TU’ANG RIGS PA MA YIN NO,,

Which brings us to our third point from before—a summary of the denials we have made.  Thus it is—from both the point of view of the ultimate, and of the deceptive (that of the everyday world); it doesn’t matter which—that the idea that things could grow from themselves is a logical contradiction.  The fanciful idea that “both outer & inner objects grow from themselves” is simply illogical, both from the point of view of the way things are (that is, ultimately), and from a deceptive point of view as well: that of the everyday world.


[1256]
DE’I PHYIR ‘PHAGS PAS BDAG SKYE ‘GOG PA NA DON DAM PA DANG KUN RDZOB KYI KHYAD PAR MA SBYAR BAR BDAG LAS MA YIN ZHES BDAG SKYE SPYIR BKAG GO

And so it is that—when the Realized One denied that things could grow from themselves—he denied this possibility in a general way, without making any distinction between it happening in an ultimate way, or in a deceptive way.


[1257]
,DES NA SLOB DPON LEGS LDAN ‘BYED KYIS DNGOS PO RNAMS NI DON DAM PAR BDAG LAS SKYE BA MA YIN TE, YOD PA’I PHYIR SEMS PA CAN BZHIN NO ZHES KHYAD PAR DU BYED PA DE’I DON DAM PAR ZHES PA’I KHYAD PAR DON MED DO ZHES BSAM PAR BYA’O,,

As such, we can consider it pointless when Master Bhavaviveka adds the distinction of this being impossible “ultimately”; expressing this distinction in the words,

It is not the case that—ultimately speaking—
things grow from themselves,  
	
	Because they exist;

	They are like living beings.



Avoiding problems well spoken

[1258]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second section from before: denying that things could grow from themselves, by using the logic employed in Master Nagarjuna’s Wisdom.


	[1259]
[VI.13]
Janyasya caiva janakasya ca karmaṇaś ca
kartuś ca janmani bhavet svata iṣyamāṇe,
Aikyaṃ na caikyam anayor iti nābhyupeyaṃ
janma svato vihita vistara doṣa sakteḥ.

,BDAG LAS SKYE BAR ‘DOD NA BSKYED PAR BYA DANG
SKYED BYED DANG,
,LAS DANG BYED PA PO YANG GCIG NYID ‘GYUR NA
DE DAG NI,
,GCIG NYID MA YIN PAS NA BDAG LAS SKYE BAR
KHAS BLANG PAR,
,BYA MIN RGYA CHER BSHAD PA’I NYES PAR THAL BAR
‘GYUR PHYIR RO,

		If we accept that a thing
		Could grow from itself,
		It would be the case that

		The thing being produced;
		And the thing doing the producing;
		The very act; and the agent
		Would have to be one & the same.
	
		They are though not the same;
		And so the idea that something
		Could grow from itself
		Is not something that we
		Should ever accept.

		After all, the problems
		Described at length
		Would then result.


[1260]
SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE, ,’BRAS BU BDAG LAS SKYE BAR ‘DOD NA, BSKYED PAR BYA BA ‘BRAS BU DANG, SKYED PAR BYED PA RGYU DANG, GANG ZHIG BYA BA’I LAS DANG, GANG GIS BYED PA’I BYED PA PO YANG GCIG NYID DU ‘GYUR NA, DE DAG NI GCIG NYID MA YIN PAS NA, BDAG LAS SKYE BAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA BA MIN TE, BSTAN BCOS ‘DI DANG RTZA SHE LAS RGYA CHER BSHAD PA’I NYES PAR THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

There are still other problems with the idea of the result coming from a cause that was one with it.  If we accept that a result could grow from itself, then it would be the case that the result (the thing being produced); and the cause (the thing doing the producing); and the very action of this production; and the agent (the one performing the action) would have to be all one & the same thing.  The fact though is that they are not one & the same; and so the idea that something could grow from itself is not something that one should ever accept.  Because after all, all the problems with this idea described at length in the present classical commentary, and in Wisdom, would then result.


[1261]
DE LA SKYON DANG PO NI RTZA SHE LAS,
,RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GCIG NYID DU,
,NAM YANG ‘THAD PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,
,RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GCIG NYID NA,
,SKYED DANG BSKYED PA GCIG TU ‘GYUR,

The first of these problems is described in Wisdom with the following lines:

It could never be correct
That the cause and its result
Could be one & the same.

If the cause and result
Really were the same,

Then what does the producing
And what is produced
Would have to be the same.


[1262]
ZHES GSUNGS TE RGYU ‘BRAS NGO BO GCIG NA PHA DANG BU DAG GAM, MIG DANG DE’I RNAM SHES DAG KYANG GCIG NYID DU ‘GYUR ZHES PA’O,,

What this is saying is that—if a cause and its result were such that to be one were to be the other—then parents would be one & the same with their children; and the organ of the eye would be one & the same with the visual consciousness which resulted from it.


[1263]
SKYON GNYIS PA NI RTZA SHE LAS,
,GAL TE SHING DE ME YIN NA,
,BYED PA PO DANG LAS GCIG ‘ GYUR,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’O,,

The second of the problems is described in these lines, also from Wisdom:

If the wood were the fire,
Then the agent and action
Would be one & the same.


[1264]
DE LTAR BKAG PA NA PHA DANG BU DANG BYED PA PO DANG LAS GNYIS KYANG NGO BO GCIG TU THAL ZER NA ‘DOD LA, SPYIR GCIG TU THAL [f. 97b] ZER NA MA KHYAB BO ZHES SMRA MOD KYANG, SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI RANG BZHIN GCIG TU ‘DOD NA RNAM ‘GYUR YANG GCIG TU ‘PHUL NUS PA’I RIGS PAS SPONG MI NUS SO,,

When you are doing this kind of refutation, and someone says “Well, in that case, parents would have to be the same person as their children; and the agent of a particular action would have to be that action”—the reply we’d give is “Agreed!”  When we say though in general that they would have to be the same, someone could admittedly reply “It doesn’t necessarily follow.”  The fact remains though that it is impossible, logically, to deny the implication that—if someone agrees that the seed & the sprout share, as described above, a single identity—then all of their manifestations would have as well to be totally the same.


[1265]
DE’I PHYIR JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I SKYON GYIS ‘JIGS PAS BDEN GNYIS PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR RTOGS PAR ‘DOD PAS, BDAG SKYE KHAS BLANG BAR MI BYA’O ZHES GSUNGS LA, BDAG LAS SKYE BA YOD MED KYANG GCIG YONGS SU GCOD PA CIG SHOS RNAM PAR BCAD PA MED NA MED PA’I DNGOS ‘GAL YIN PAS BDAG LAS SKYE BA MED PA NI NGES PAR KHAS BLANGS GOS {%DGOS} SO,,

And so in dread of the problems described above, and desirous of realizing the two kinds of reality in a manner which is unmistaken, we must say, “The idea that something could grow from itself is not something that we can accept.”  Whether or not things did in fact grow from themselves, there is a principle of direct, comprehensive contradiction at work here, where when you eliminate one possibility the other cannot have been eliminated.  As such, we must indeed accept the idea that things cannot grow from themselves.



The only option left?

[1266]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG BA’O,,

This brings us to our second major point from above, which is denying that things could grow from something other than themselves.  Here first we will state the position of others with whom we disagree; and then show how we disprove this position.


[1267]
DANG PO NI, RANG SDE DNGOS POR SMRA BA RNAMS NA RE RANG LAS SKYE BA DON MED PAS BDAG SKYE MI RIGS SHING, DE MED PAS GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA YANG MI RIGS SO,,

Here is the first.  Schools that belong to the Functionalist group would say:

There is no point served, if it were the case that something grew from itself; as such, the idea that something could in fact grow from itself is mistaken.  And if that’s impossible, then so would it be for things to grow both from themselves, and from other things.


[1268]
RGYU MED NI GCIG TU THA CHAD PAS DGAG PAR YANG RIGS NA, GZHAN DAG LAS LTA GA LA ZHIG CES GZHAN SKYE ‘GOG PA MI RIGS TE,

Saying that things could grow without any cause at all is the worst idea of all; and so it too is something we would have to deny.  Given all this, it would be a mistake to try to deny the remaining possibility, that things grow from something other than themselves: it would be a mistake to say, “And how on earth could things grow from something other than themselves?”


[1269]
RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GZHAN DU GYUR PA’I RKYEN BZHI DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI SKYED BYED DU GSUNGS PA’I GSUNG RAB LA LTOS NAS, MI ‘DOD BZHIN DU YANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’O,,

This group looks at references from scripture which state that four different types of conditions which exist, by definition, as something other than their results function to produce things.  And so whether they want to or not, they find themselves in a position where they have to say that things do in fact grow from something other than themselves.


[1270]
RKYEN BZHI PO DE GANG LA ‘JOG PA LA, SDE PA KHA CIG NI RGYU’I RKYEN NI MDZOD LAS, RGYU ZHES BYA BA RGYU LNGA YIN ZHES BYED RGYU MA GTOGS PA RGYU LNGA DANG,

How are these four conditions described?  Here is how a number of schools of thought proceed.  First there is the (1) “causal condition,” which in the Treasure House of Higher Knowledge is described as referring to five of the six traditional types of causes: all but the “effective” type of cause.  As this work itself puts it,

The one we call “causal”
Consists of five of the causes.


[1271]
DMIGS PA’I RKYEN NI, DMIGS PA CHOS RNAMS THAMS CAD DO, ZHES RNAM SHES DRUG GI DMIGS YUL GYI CHOS THAMS CAD DANG,

The (2) “object condition” is described as all the entities in the universe which serve as objects of focus for the six categories of consciousness.  As the Treasure House again puts it,

The one we call “object”
Includes all entities there are.


[1272]
DE MA THAG RKYEN NI, 
,SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG SKYES PA [f. 98a] RNAMS,
,THA MA MIN MTSUNGS DE MA THAG
,CES LHAG MED DU ‘JUG PA LAS GZHAN PA’I SEMS SEMS BYUNG SNGAR SKYES RNAMS DANG,

The (3) “immediately-preceding condition” refers to instances of main mind, and mental functions, which grow previous to a current mental state; the one case where the mind enters nirvana without remainder is excepted.  Here the Treasure House says: 

The “immediately-preceding” one
Refers to previous states

Of main mind & mental functions
That share a mental link,
Except those for the final one.


[1273]
BDAG PO’I RKYEN NI, BYED RGYU ZHES BYA BDAG POR BSHAD, ,CES BYED RGYU LA BSHAD PA LTAR ‘DOD LA,

The description for the (4) “dominant” condition is said to match the explanation for the “effective” cause; again, the Treasure House:

What we call
The “effective” cause
Is explained as the “dominant.”


[1274]
RGYU DRUG NI MDZOD LAS,
,BYED RGYU LHAN CIG ‘BYUNG BA DANG,
,SKAL MNYAM MTSUNGS PAR LDAN PA DANG,
,KUN TU ‘GRO DANG RNAM SMIN DANG,
,RGYU NI RNAM PA DRUG TU ‘DOD,
CES SO,,

The six classical types of causes are listed as follows, also from the Treasure House:

They say that the causes
Number six in kind:

The effective cause;
The simultaneous;
The generic; those that share
A mental link;
The omnipresent; and
Those that ripen.


[1275]
SDE PA KHA CIG NI, SGRUB PAR BYED PA NI RGYU YIN ZHES MTSAN NYID BSTAN PA LAS NA, GANG ZHIG GANG GI SKYED BYED SA BON GYI NGO BOR GNAS PA DE NI DE’I RGYU’I RKYEN NO,,

Certain schools of thought give the definition of a cause as “anything which brings about another thing”; and so we can say that they view a causal condition as any entity whose nature is to be a seed which functions to produce any particular object.


[1276]
RGAN PO LDANG BA LTAR SEMS SEMS BYUNG SKYE BZHIN PA RNAMS RTEN ‘KHAR BA DANG ‘DRA BA’I DMIGS PA GANG GIS SKYED PA DE NI DE’I DMIGS PA’I RKYEN NO,,

And then they would say that an object condition refers to any particular object of perception which acts as the basis for the arisal of an instance of main mind, or a mental function; which helps these to grow—similar to the way in which a cane is used by an elderly person to stand from a sitting position.


[1277]
RGYU ‘GAGS MA THAG PA NI ‘BRAS BU SKYE BA’I DE MA THAG PA’I RKYEN YIN TE, DPER NA SA BON ‘GAGS MA THAG PA MYU GU ‘BYUNG BA’I RKYEN YIN PA BZHIN NO,,

An immediately-preceding condition is one where its result grows just after the cause has ended; for example, the instant when the seed has just ended is a condition for the sprout to appear.


[1278]
RANG ‘GREL LAS SA BON ‘GAGS MA THAG PA MYU GU’I MTSUNGS PA DE MA THAG PA’I RKYEN {%MA} YIN PA LTA BU’O, ZHES GSUNGS SHING TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG DE MA THAG RKYEN ‘GOG PA’I SKABS SU, MYU GU’I MTSUNGS PA DE MA THAG PA’I RKYEN BKAG LA, SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS KYANG DE BZHIN DU BZHED PAS ‘DI NI GZUGS LA YANG MTSUNGS PA DE MA THAG PA’I RKYEN ‘DOD PA’I LUGS SO,,

The autocommentary contains a reference where it says “This is similar to the case where the instant when the seed has just ended cannot be said to be an immediately-preceding condition involved in a mental link.”  A Clarification of the Verses also denies, for a sprout, an immediately-preceding condition involved in a mental link; this is inside the section where it disproves the idea of an immediately-preceding condition.  Master Buddha Palita takes the same position; and so we can say that the system we are describing here is one that does accept the idea of an immediately-preceding condition involved in a mental link, even for physical objects.


[1279]
GANG ZHIG YOD NA GANG ‘BYUNG BA ‘DI NI DE’I BDAG PO’I RKYEN NO,,

The dominant condition of a thing then is described as any entity which is present when another thing occurs.


[1280]
TSIG GSAL LAS SNGAR SKYES PA DANG LHAN CIG SKYES PA DANG PHYIS [f. 98b] SKYE BA LA SOGS PA YANG ‘DI DAG GI NANG DU ‘DU BAR GSUNGS SHING RANG ‘GREL LAS KYANG DANG PO MA GTOGS PA DE BZHIN DU GSUNGS PA NI, SHES RAB SGRON MA LAS, SDE PA GZHAN GYIS BRTAGS PA’I RKYEN MDUN DU SKYES PA DANG YOD PA DANG MED PA RNAMS ZHES BSGYUR BA DANG DON GCIG LA ‘GYUR YANG DE LTAR LEGS SO,,

A Clarification of the Verses says that things which have already grown; and things that are growing at the moment; and things that will grow later on—and so on—are also subsumed by the conditions described here.  The autocommentary as well says the same thing for all the conditions except for the first.  These statements are best understood in the same sense as they appear in the translation of the Lamp of Wisdom where it refers to “conditions that other groups imagine to be: the one that comes in front; the one that exists; and the one that doesn’t exist.”


[1281]
DE’I DON NI ‘GREL BSHAD LAS GNAS BRTAN PA’I SDE PAS THA SNYAD BTAGS PA MDUN DU SKYES PA’I RKYEN NI, DBANG PO RNAMS KYI MNGON SUM GYI MDUN DU SKYES PA DMIGS RKYEN NO,,

The meaning here, according to the explication, is that the condition named by the Elder School as the “condition in front” is a reference to a condition which has appeared in front of the direct perception by the sense organ; that is, the object condition.


[1282]
YOD PA’I RKYEN NI RGYU DANG BDAG PO’I RKYEN NO, ,MED PA’I RKYEN NI DE MA THAG PA’I RKYEN LA BSHAD DO,,

The expression “condition that exists” here is explained as a reference to the causal and dominant conditions.  “Condition that doesn’t exist” then is a reference to the immediately-preceding condition.


[1283]
DE ‘DRA BA’I THA SNYAD TZAM MI MTHUN PA RNAMS NI MTSAN NYID LA BRTAGS NA BZHI PO ‘DIR ‘DU LA, DBANG PHYUG LA SOGS PA NI RKYEN MA YIN PAS RKYEN LNGA PA NI YOD PA MA YIN NO, ,ZHES NGES PAR ‘DZIN TE

All of these types are different only in name; if we dig into their defining characteristics, we discover that they are all taken in by the list of four conditions.  The descriptions are also meant to help us come to a definite conclusion that, as we see, “there is no fifth type of condition; for creator gods & the like are not conditions that can make things grow.”


[1284]
MDZOD LAS,
,BZHI YIS SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG RNAMS,
,GSUM GYIS SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG RNAM GNYIS,
,GZHAN NI GNYIS PO DAG LAS SKYE,
,DBANG PHYUG SOGS MIN RIM SOGS PHYIR,
ZHES BSHAD PA BZHIN DU ‘DOD DO,,

As the Treasure House of Higher Knowledge puts it,

	Four produce the mind
	And mental functions,

	And three two kinds
	Of balanced meditation;

	The others are produced
	From two of them.

	Things though are not produced
	By things like a creator god,
	For they arise in stages, and such.



Denying schools that say
things can grow from themselves

[1285]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, GZHAN SKYE ‘DOD PA’I PHYOGS SPYIR DGAG PA DANG, SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS BYE BRAG TU DGAG PA’O,,

Having stated the position of others on how things grow from something other than themselves, we turn now to showing how we disprove this position.  This will include two sections: a general denial of schools which accept that something can grow from something else; and then a more specific denial of the explanation of this point by the Mind Only school.


[1286]
DANG PO LA LNGA, GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA DNGOS, BKAG PA LA ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA SPANG BA, DE LTAR BKAG PA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA ‘GAR YANG MED PAR BSTAN PA, BDEN PA GNYIS CHAR DU’ANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA BKAG PA’I YON TAN [f. 99a] BSTAN PA’O,,

We’ll cover the first section in five parts:
	
 The actual denial of the idea that things could grow from
something other than themselves
 Overcoming objections which say that this denial in any way
contradicts the beliefs of the everyday world
 Demonstrating the advantages of the denial
 Demonstrating that there is no possible instance where
it would be correct to say that things could grow through
any nature of their own
	 Demonstrating the advantages of denying that things could grow
		through any nature of their own, relative to both forms
		of reality


[1287]
DANG PO LA GSUM, GZHAN SKYE SPYIR DGAG PA, GZHAN SKYE BYE BRAG TU DGAG PA, ‘BRAS BU LA MU BZHIR DPYAD NAS GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA’O,,

The first of these parts has three steps of its own:

	 A general denial that things could grow from something
other than themselves
	 A more particular denial that things could grow this way
	 A denial that things could grow from something other than 
		themselves, accomplished by examining four possible
		permutations.


[1288]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, HA CANG THAL BAS DGAG ,SKYON SPONG GI LAN DGAG PA’O,,

The first of these steps covers two points of its own: denying this kind of growth because it would be absurd; and then denying a response which attempts to avoid this problem.


[1289]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, HA CANG THAL BA DNGOS DANG, DE DAG GI MTHA’ DPYAD PA’O,,

And then finally the first of these points will cover two topics: the actual demonstration of absurdity, followed by a logical examination of the points.



The absurdity of a thing
growing from something
other than itself

[1290]
DANG PO NI, GZHAN SKYE ‘DI NI GZHAG PAR NUS PA MA YIN TE, RIGS PA DANG LUNG DANG ‘GAL BA’I PHYIR RO,,

And so here is that first point.  This idea that something could grow from something else is not something that anyone could ever be able to establish as true, for it contradicts both logic and scripture.


[1291]
PHYI MA NI SA LU LJANG BA’I MDO LAS, MING DANG GZUGS KYI MYU GU DE YANG BDAG GIS MA BYAS GZHAN GYIS MA BYAS ZHES PA LTA BU’I LUNG PHYI MA LTA BU MANG PO DANG ‘GAL BA’O,,

As for latter of these two, the idea contradicts many references found in scripture, such as the latter half of the statement from the sutra entitled A Sprout of Rice where it says, “The sprout of name & form is not created by itself; nor is it created by something other than itself.”


	[1292]
[VI.14]
Anyat pratītya yadi nāma paro’bhaviṣyaj
jāyeta tarhi bahulaḥ śikhino’ndhakāraḥ,
Sarvasya janma ca bhavet khalu sarvataś ca
tulyaṃ paratvam akhile’janake’pi yasmāt.

,GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS GAL TE GZHAN ZHIG ‘BYUNG BAR 
‘GYUR NA NI,
,’O NA ME LCE LAS KYANG MUN PA ‘THUG PO
‘BYUNG ‘GYUR ZHING,
,THAMS CAD LAS KYANG THAMS CAD SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE
GANG GI PHYIR,
,SKYED PAR BYED PA MA YIN MA LUS LA YANG
GZHAN NYID MTSUNGS,

		Suppose it were the case
		That something other
		Could grow, based on
		Something other;

		Well then we would get
		A thick darkness
		Even from flames.
	
		And all objects
		Would have to grow
		From all other objects;

		For the reason that
		Each & every thing
		That did not act
		To produce the thing

		Would be exactly the same,
		In being different.
	

[1293]
DE LA RIGS PA’I DBANG DU BYAS NAS BRJOD PA, GAL TE RANG GIS NGO BOS GRUB PA’I RGYU GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA’I ‘BRAS BU GZHAN ZHIG ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR NA NI, 

Turning now to the logic here, suppose it were indeed the case that a result which was something other than the cause—and which existed in & of itself—could grow based on a cause which was something other than the result, and which also existed in & of itself.


[1294]
DE LTA YIN PA ‘O NA SEL BYED ME LCE RAB TU ‘BAR BA LAS KYANG BSAL BYA MUN PA ‘THUG PO ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

If that were the case, then well even when bright flames—the agent which dispels darkness—burst forth, we would get a thick darkness, the object of the dispelling.


[1295]
GZHAN YANG RGYU YIN MIN THAMS CAD LAS KYANG ‘BRAS BU’I DNGOS PO YIN MIN THAMS CAD SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE, CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA,

Moreover, it would also be true that all objects—whether they are things which are results or not—would have to grow from all other objects, whether they are causes or not.  And why would these be the case?


[1296]
GANG GI PHYIR ‘BRAS BU DE SKYED PAR BYED PA MA YIN PA MA LUS PA LA’ANG RGYU ‘BRAS SU ‘DOD PA GNYIS DANG, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID MTSUNGS PAR YOD PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GZHAN GYIS KHAS BLANGS PA’I GTAN TSIGS LA BRTEN PA’I HA CANG THAL BA GNYIS SO,,

They would be this way for the reason that each & every thing that did not act to produce a result would also be exactly the same, in being different from what we agreed to be the two of cause & effect.  And so we come up with two completely absurd consequences that arise from the argument accepted by the other party here.


[1297]
THAL BA DE GNYIS BSHAD NA JI LTAR SA LU SKYED PA’I SA BON RANG ‘BRAS SA LU’I MYU GU LAS, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN YIN PA [f. 99b] DE BZHIN DU, SA LU’I MYU GU SKYED BYED MA YIN PA ME DANG SOL BA DANG, NAS KYI SA BON LA SOGS PA YANG SA LU’I MYU GU LAS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN YIN PA NI GZHAN SKYE SMRA BA RNAMS KYI ‘DOD TSUL LO,,

Let’s look into these two absurdities.  Suppose that the seed which produced a sprout of rice were, by definition, something other than the sprout which was its result.  Things that were not agents in the production of a rice sprout then—things like a fire, or a lump of coal, or a barley seed—would also be, according to our other party here, objects which were, by definition, other than the rice sprout.  This is what those who support the idea of things growing from things that are other than them are agreeing to.


[1298]
GZHAN YIN TSUL GNYIS PO DE MTSUNGS PAR ‘DOD NA, JI LTAR SA LU’I SA BON GZHAN DU GYUR PA LAS SA LU’I MYU GU SKYE BA DE BZHIN DU, ME SOL SOGS LAS KYANG SA LU’I MYU GU SKYE BAR ‘GYUR DGOS SO,,

If we accept that the manner in which things are “other” or “different” than each other is equivalent in the two cases, then—in the same way in which a rice sprout grows from a rice seed which is something other than it—a sprout would also have to grow from things like a fire, or a lump of coal.


[1299]
YANG JI LTAR SA LU’I MYU GU GZHAN DU GYUR PA, SA LU’I SA BON LAS SKYE BA BZHIN DU, BUM SNAM SOGS KYANG SA LU’I SA BON LAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES MTSUNGS PA BYED PA’O,,

We’d also have to say that—just as a rice sprout which is something other than the rice seed grows from that seed—then things like water pitchers and bolts of cloth would also have to grow from the rice seed.  This then is a second statement of absurdity equivalent to the first.


[1300]
‘DI NI RTZA SHE LAS,
,RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GZHAN NYID DU,
,NAM YANG ‘THAD PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,
,RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GZHAN NYID NA,
,RGYU DANG RGYU MIN MTSUNGS PAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES GZHAN SKYE LA HA CANG THAL BA GSUNGS PA’I RIGS PA’O,,

All this is a kind of reasoning, which derives from Arya Nagarjuna’s Wisdom, to express how completely absurd it would be if things grew from other things that were different from them.  As the Arya puts it,
	
	It could never be correct to say
	That causes and results
	Were something perfectly different
	One from the other.

	If causes and results
	Were indeed completely different,
	Then things that were not causes
	Would be just the same as the causes.


[1301]
THAL BA GNYIS KA LA BZLOG PA ‘PHEN PA ‘GREL PAR BSHAD DO,,

The autocommentary describes both of these absurd statements as the type which implies the truth of the very opposite of what the opponent is asserting.



The source of the absurdity

[1302]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, GZHAN SKYE LA HA CANG THAL BA ‘JUG PA’I RGYU MTSAN, THAL BA LAS BZLOG PA KHAS LEN PA YI ‘GAL BA’O,,

Having completed our demonstration of absurdity, we move on to the second topic here: a logical examination of the relevant points.  This itself comes in two steps: the reason why the idea that things could grow from something else leads to the absurdity; and then the contradiction that arises from accepting the opposite of the absurdity.


[1303]
DANG PO NI, ‘DIR GZHAN SKYE KHAS LEN PA LA HA CANG THAL BA’I SKYON ‘JUG PA’I RGYU MTSAN LA, BOD KHA CIG RGYU ‘BRAS LA SNGA PHYI BAS KHYAB CING, GZHAN LA DUS MNYAM DGOS PA’I GNAD KYIS YIN ZER BA NI

Here is the first.  Let’s look into the reason why accepting the idea that things could grow from something else leads into the absurdity.  Some Tibetan thinkers have claimed that this absurdity turns on the fact that—whereas cause & effect must always involve one thing coming before another—if we accept that things grow from something other than themselves, then the cause and its effect would have to be simultaneous.


[1304]
SHIN TU MI RIGS TE, DE LTAR BKAG PA’I SKYON THAMS CAD RANG LA MTSUNGS PAR ‘JUG PA’I PHYIR DANG, DE LA KHAS BLANGS MED DO ZHES PAS BSNYON NA, DE’I RGYU MTSAN ‘TSAL BA’I NGAL BA DON MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This position though is totally mistaken.  First of all, all the objections that are raised in doing the refutation this way would apply just as well to our own position.  And if you backtrack from the position you took and then say “we are free of all opinions on the subject,” then the exercise of attempting to identify why the absurdity applies becomes one of fruitless futility.


[1305]
YANG [f. 100a] BOD MANG POS RTOG GE BAS DU BA KHYAD PAR BA YOD PA LA ME YOD PAS KHYAB PA DANG, BYAS PA LA MI RTAG PAS KHYAB PA SGRUB PA NA, YUL DUS THAMS CAD DU MI ‘KHRUL PA SGRUB PA YIN LA,

There are other Tibetan thinkers, logicians, who would make yet another claim:

There are cases where we establish that—whenever a particular instance of smoke is present—then fire must also be there; or that whenever something is a thing that was created, then it must also be a changing thing.  And when we do establish these facts, then we establish that they they necessarily hold true in all places, and all times.


[1306]
DE SGRUB PA’I TSE NI TSANG MANG DANG BUM PA LTA BU NYI TSE BA GCIG GI STENG DU BSGRUBS NAS, DE NAS DE DANG YUL DUS GZHAN GYI KHYAB PA GNYIS RIGS MTSUNGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN GYIS,

And when we establish that, then we establish in turn that these relationships must hold true in every single random case, or point in time: in the kitchen, or with water pot.  Again, when they hold in a single case, then by reason of logical equivalence they would hold as well in every other place or time.


[1307]
KHYAB PA DE GNYIS YUL DUS THAMS CAD KYI STENG DU MI ‘KHRUL BAR SGRUB PAR ‘DOD PA LA, DE LTA NA GZHAN TZAM DU MTSUNGS PA’I RTAGS KYIS HA CANG THAL BA ‘PHEN TE, ‘DI ‘DRA BA NI LDOG PA GCIG PA’I DPUNG ‘PHUL LO, ZHES ZER RO,,

But it would be absurd then to say that—just because these necessary relationships would hold true in every single location or moment—they would hold equally true for any other two objects we chose, simply because they were different from each other.  In that case you’d simply piling up logically necessary opposites.


[1308]
‘DI YANG GZHUNG GI DON MA NGES SHING RTOG GE’I ‘JUG PA LA RNAM PA MA SHAR BA’I GTAM YIN TE, DU BA KHYAD PAR BA DANG BYAS PA GNYIS YUL DUS KYIS KHYAD PAR DU MA BYAS PAR, SPYIR ME DANG MI RTAG PA LA MI ‘KHRUL BAR BSGRUBS PAS,

This kind of talk though simply reflects a failure to grasp the point of the scripture here; and an inability to adhere to logical form.  Even if we fail to specify a particular location or point in time for a particular instance of smoke, or for the quality of being made, it still holds true that they will always imply—in general—fire; or the quality of being changing.


[1309]
ME YOD PA DANG MI RTAG PA YIN PA LOG KYANG, RTAGS SU BKOD PA GNYIS MI LDOG PA SRID DAM SNYAM PA’I DOGS PA LEGS PAR GCOD NUS LA,

That in itself is enough to prevent, perfectly, the uncertainty where someone wonders whether—even if the presence of fire, or the quality of being changing, are cancelled—it might still be possible that the items put forth as the reason in each case could not be cancelled.


[1310]
CHOS DE GNYIS RGYU ‘BRAS YIN PA LOG KYANG GZHAN TZAM YIN PA ZHUGS PA DU MA ZHIG YOD PAS, DE GNYIS MTSUNGS PA’I GO SKABS GA LA YOD,

There are, moreover, a great many cases where we can demonstrate that two objects share no cause-and-effect relationship, and yet are still such that they are other than each other.  How then could there be a case where the two relationships were equivalent?


[1311]
DES NA ‘DI NI DPUNG ‘PHUL ZHES PA’I MING NYID KYIS RIGS PA MI SHES PA’I SUN ‘BYIN DU GSAL BAR BYAS TE GZHAN DU RGYAS PAR BSHAD ZIN TO,,

We can thus say that the phrase itself here—“piling up logically necessary opposites”—clearly indicates that the refutation being attempted here is one set forth by a person who has no understanding of logic.  I have already covered this point, at length, elsewhere.


[1312]
‘O NA ‘DI JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA, TSIG GSAL LAS, RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM GYIS KUN RDZOB GRUB PAR KHAS LEN GYI, PHYOGS BZHI KHAS [f. 100b] BLANGS PA’I SGO NAS NI MA YIN TE, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PAR THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR DANG, DE YANG RIGS PA MA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

“Well then,” one may ask, “what does the absurdity actually turn upon?”  Let’s begin with a reference from A Clarification of the Verses:

What we say is that something is established as being deceptive reality simply by reason of this dependence upon conditions—it’s not that we say it’s due to accepting these four possibilities.  Because if that were the case, then working things would have to possess some nature of their own; whereas that is something illogical.


[1313]
RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM ZHIG KHAS BLANGS NA NI, RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GNYIS PHAN TSUN LTOS BA’I PHYIR NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA YOD PA MA YIN PAS, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PAR SMRA BAR ‘GYUR BA MA YIN NO,,

And if we do accept this idea of depending upon conditions, then these two—causes & effects—would have to be interdependent.  In that case, they could no longer exist in & of themselves; and it would not be the case that we would then become thinkers who assert that these working things have some nature of their own.


[1314]
ZHES RANG GIS SKYE BA KHAS LEN MI LEN GYI KHYAD PAR GNYIS DANG, DE GNYIS KYI RGYU MTSAN DU PHYOGS BZHI’I SKYE BA KHAS BLANGS NA, RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PAR SMRA DGOS PAR GSUNGS PAS,

What this is saying is that—if we recognize a difference between accepting or not accepting the growth of things, and if we accept the idea that the difference between the two turns upon accepting that things must grow in one of the four ways—then we would have to be someone who asserts that these things possess some nature of their own.


[1315]
GZHAN SKYE KHAS BLANGS NA RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA KHAS LEN DGOS PA DANG, RTEN ‘BREL GYI SKYE BA TZAM ZHIG KHAS BLANGS NA, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA KHAS LEN MI DGOS PAR GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

And so what the reference is really stating, quite clearly, is that—if we accept the idea that things grow from something other than themselves—then we have to accept the idea that things could grow through some nature of their own; and that if rather we simply accept a kind of growing where things depend on each other, then we needn’t accept the idea that they could grow through such a nature.


[1316]
DE LTAR NA GZHAN SKYE’I GZHAN NI GZHAN TZAM ZHIG MIN GYI, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN YIN PAS DE KHAS LEN PA LA HA CANG THAL BA ‘PHEN GYI, GZHAN TZAM KHAS BLANGS PA LA ‘PHEN PA GTAN MIN NO,,

We can thus say that the phrase “something other than itself” in the expression “the idea that something could grow from something other than itself” doesn’t just refer to something other.  Rather, it’s a reference to something other which could exist through some nature of its own; and thus we can build a statement of complete absurdity based on accepting it.  It is not at all the case though that you could build this absurdity based on the other party accepting that things could grow from something that was simply other.


[1317]
‘OG NAS KYANG SKAD CIG SNGA PHYI THA DAD KYANG RGYUD GCIG TU ‘DOD PA LA,
,GANG DAG RANG MTSAN NYID KYIS SO SO BA,
,DE DAG RGYUD GCIG GTOGS PAR RIGS MA YIN,
ZHES RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I SO SO BA YIN NA, SNGA PHYI RGYUD GCIG TU GTOGS PA MI RIGS PAR GSUNGS PA DANG ‘DI GNYIS RIGS PA ‘DRA’O,,

Further on we’ll be agreeing, in addition, to the idea that successive moments in the flow of a thing—despite the fact that they are distinct from one another—can nonetheless together constitute a flow of the thing.  As the text puts it,

It would be incorrect to say
That two parts which were separate
Through some nature of their own

Could ever be included
Into the flow of a single thing.

This statement—that if successive moments of a thing were distinct from one another through some nature of their own, then it would be illogical to say that they were included into the flow of a single thing—is based upon the same sort of reasoning that we see here with something “other.”


[1318]
DE YANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN YIN NA LTOS PA’I ‘BREL BA ‘GOG NUS LA, ‘BREL MED DON GZHAN DU SONG NA ‘BRAS BU GCIG [f. 101a] RANG GI RGYU LAS SKYE NA, RGYU MIN PA THAMS CAD LAS KYANG SKYE BA DANG, RGYU GCIG GIS RANG GI ‘BRAS BU SKYED NA RANG GI ‘BRAS BU MIN PA’I ‘BRAS BU’I DNGOS PO THAMS CAD SKYED PAR HA CANG THAL BA ‘JUG PA’O,,

Further, if something really were something other than something else through some nature of its own, then that would thereby have the power to disprove the concept of a dependent relationship, and the two objects involved would come to be things that were disparate entities with no connection at all.  And in that case, whenever a particular result grew from its particular cause, it would as well grow from each & every object in the universe that was not its particular cause.  It would also then be the case that—whenever a particular cause produced its particular result—then it would as well produce all resulting entities that were not that particular result.  Thus this position would indeed lead to certain complete absurdities.


[1319]
DES NA ‘DI ‘DRA BA’I RIGS PA LEGS PAR MI GO BA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI ‘DI ‘DRA CIG ‘GOG PA’I DGAG BYA ‘DZIN PA’I TSAD ‘DZIN DANG, ‘DI TZAM ZHIG KHAS LEN PA’I RTEN ‘BYUNG GI RNAM GZHAG GNYIS SO SOR LEGS PAR MA PHYED PA’I SKYON YIN PAS, DGAG BYA ‘GOG PA’I SKABS SU DGAG BYA’I TSAD ‘DZIN BSHAD PA DRAN PAR BYA’O,,

And so we can say that—if a person lacked a clear understanding of the sort of reasoning employed here—then they would fall into the error of failing to distinguish, perfectly, between the exercise where we take the measure of that thing which our logic is meant to deny, denying the existence of the particular object that we described earlier; and a presentation of the particular form of dependence which we do agree to.  As such, I would ask the reader to reflect again upon our explanation of how to take the measure of the object whose existence we do deny, back in the section where we disproved this object.



Demonstrating absurdity
is not automatically
to accept its opposite

[1320]
GNYIS PA NI, GAL TE SNGAR BSHAD PA’I THAL BA GNYIS LAS BZLOG PA’I DON KHAS LEN NA, TSIG GSAL LAS, THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA BZLOG PA’I DON DANG YANG PHA ROL PO NYID ‘BREL BA YIN GYI, KHO BO CAG NI MA YIN TE, RANG LA DAM BCA’ BA MED PA’I PHYIR RO, ,ZHES DANG,

This brings us to the second step from above: the contradiction which arises from accepting the opposite of the absurdity.  One may begin with the following question, in three parts:

Well, assume that what we are supposed to accept is the point which is the opposite of the two absurdities which have just been presented.  How then, first of all, can A Clarification of the Verses then make the statement that “And if we examine the point which is the opposite of the absurdity, we would have to say that it relates to the position of the other party; and not to our own.  And that’s because we take no position on the matter at all.”


[1321]
RANG BZHIN MED PAR SMRA BAS RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PAR SMRA BA LA THAL BA BSGRUBS PA NA, THAL BA LAS BZLOG PA’I DON CAN DU THAL BAR GA LA ‘GYUR TE, ZHES DANG,

And how can the work further then state, “Why on earth would it be the case that—when those who deny that things have any nature of their own demonstrate an absurd consequence of the beliefs of those who say that things do have such a nature—they would then necessarily have to be thinkers who support the point which is the opposite of this absurdity?”


[1322]
DE’I PHYIR THAL BA SGRUB PA NI PHA ROL PO’I DAM BCA’ BA ‘GOG PA TZAM GYI ‘BRAS BU CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR, THAL BA LAS BZLOG PA’I DON DU ‘GYUR BA YOD PA MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA RNAMS JI LTAR DRANG SNYAM NA,

How finally can the same text say, “As such the demonstration of absurdity here is meant only to have the effect of denying the position of the other party; it is not the case that there is some point which is the opposite of the absurdity and which is meant to be included into this effect.”


[1323]
SKYON MED DE DE LTAR GSUNGS PA NI BDAG SKYE ‘GOG PA’I SKABS KHO NA YIN PAS, DBU MA PAS ‘PHANGS PA’I THAL BA KUN LA MIN GYI, BDAG SKYE ‘GOG PA’I [f. 101b] THAL BA GNYIS LA YIN NO,

And yet there are no such issues here.  These statements apply only to the present context, where we are denying that things could grow through some kind of self-nature.  They are not meant to apply to all absurd consequences ever drawn from other thinkers’ positions by members of the Middle Way school; rather, they apply only here, to these two absurd consequences pointed out as we deny that things could grow through such a self-nature.


[1324]
DE’I THAL CHOS NI SKYE BA DON MED DANG THUG MED DU THAL BA TZAM MIN GYI, SLAR YANG SKYE BA DON MED DANG THUG MED YIN LA, THAL CHOS DE BZLOG PA’I DON SLAR YANG SKYE BA DON BCAS DANG THUG BCAS NI GRANGS CAN KHO NA ‘DOD KYI, RANG LA DE’I DAM BCA’ BA MED PA’I RGYU MTSAN GYIS, DE KHAS BLANGS PA’I GRUB MTHA’ DANG ‘GAL BA MED CES PA’I DON TE LUNG DANG PO’I DON NO,,

The point of the absurdity is not solely to say that the growing of things would then have to be pointless, and endless; but rather to say that their repeated growth would be pointless and endless.  The idea that would be the opposite of these two absurdities would be that the repeated growth of things did have a point, and did come to an end—and that would be accepted only by the Numerists.  What the first citation you’ve given then is actually saying is that—because we ourselves take no position on this matter—there is no danger of our contradicting the other position that our school does take.


[1325]
SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS KYIS KYANG YANG SKYE BA DON MED CES YANG GI SGRA SMOS SHING, TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG YANG GI SGRA SMOS LA, ‘DIR YANG SLAR YANG SKYE BAR YONGS SU RTOG PAR ‘GYUR NA NI, ZHES GSUNGS PAS YOD PA DANG SLAR YANG SKYE BA GNYIS ‘GAL GYI YOD PA DANG SKYE BA MI ‘GAL LO,,

Master Buddha Palita does insert the expression “once again” here—“it would be pointless for this thing to grow once again”; and we see the “once again” mentioned as well in A Clarification of the Verses.  And here in Master Chandrakirti’s root text we see, once again, “Suppose you fantasize that it could grow again.”  The point then is that the contradiction here lies between the pair of existing and growing over again; it is not the case that the contradiction is between existing & growing.


[1326]
DE BZHIN DU YOD PA DANG SLAR YANG SKYE BA THUG BCAS ‘GAL GYI, YOD PA DANG SKYE BA THUG BCAS GNYIS MI ‘GAL LO,,

Just so, existing and growing over again—but not endlessly—are contradictory; although there is no contradiction between the pair of existing & growing, but not endlessly.


[1327]
LUNG GNYIS PA’I DON NI RANG BZHIN MED PAR SMRA BA DBU MA PAS, RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PAR SMRA BA GRANGS CAN LA SNGAR BSHAD PA’I THAL BA GNYIS ‘PHANGS PA NA, RANG LA BZLOG DON ‘PHEN PA KHAS LEN ‘DOD MED LA, DE MED KYANG RANG DBANG MED PAR BYED PAR YANG MIN PAS, THAL BA DE GNYIS LAS BZLOG PA KHAS MI LEN ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

The point of the second citation above is to express how those who say that nothing has any nature of its own—the followers of the middle way—might address the Numerists, drawing the two absurd consequences just described; but even as they do, it is not the case that they themselves would then accept the point which is the opposite of these absurdities.  And even assuming they would not want to, there is further no necessity that they would have to do so, despite themselves.  As such, what’s being said is that they would not in fact accept the points opposite to the absurdities listed.


[1328]
LUNG GSUM PA’I DON NI THAL BA GNYIS KYI THAL CHOS BZLOG PA’I DON SLAR YANG SKYE BA DON BCAS DANG THUG BCAS KYI RTAGS KYIS BDAG SKYE MED PA MI SGRUB KYANG DGOS PA MED PA MIN TE, GRANGS CAN MI ‘DOD PA’I SKYE BA DON MED DANG THUG MED BSGRUBS PAS, GRANGS CAN GYIS DAM [f. 102a] BCAS PA’I BDAG LAS SKYE BA RNAM PAR BCAD PA TZAM ZHIG SGRUB PA’I DGOS PA CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR RO ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

What the third citation is saying is the following.  The opposites of the quality being expressed in the two absurdities are (1) that there would be some point to things growing once again after they had already grown once; and (2) that such repeated growing would not be endless.  Presented as reasons, they cannot, admittedly, establish that the growth of things does not occur through any kind of self-nature.  But neither do they serve no purpose; for they do have the benefit of establishing that something which the Numerists would not want to accept—that the growth of something was pointless, and that it would be repeated endlessly—would have to be the case.  And as such, they do disallow the growth through some self-nature which the Numerists do assert.


[1329]
HA CANG THAL BA GNYIS LA NI THAL BA’I BZLOG DON RANG NYID KYIS KHAS LEN PAS, THAL BA LAS BZLOG PA’I DON LA RANG GIS KHAS LEN PA DANG MI LEN PA GNYIS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Our readers should understand then that we might first accept that there is a point which is the opposite of that which is made by these two absurdities; but that, by the same token, there are two possibilities here: one where we would ourselves accept this point that was the opposite of the absurdity, and another where we would not.



A response to absurdity

[1330]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, SKYON SPONG GI LAN, LAN DE DGAG PA’O,,

This brings us to our second point from above: denying a response which attempts to avoid the problem.  We proceed in two steps: a presentation of this response, and then denying it.


	[1331]
[VI.15]
Śakyaṃ prakartum iti kāryam ato niruktaṃ
śaktaṃ yad asya janane sa paro’pi hetuḥ,
Janmaika santati gatāj janakāc ca tasmāc
chālyaṅkurasya na tathā ca yavādi taś cet.

,RAB TU BYA BAR NUS PA DE PHYIR ‘BRAS BUR
DES {%NGES} BRJOD CING,
,GANG ZHIG DE SKYED NUS PA DE NI GZHAN NA’ANG
RGYU YIN LA,
,RGYUD GCIG GTOGS DANG SKYED PAR BYED LAS SKYE BA
DE YI PHYIR,
,S’A LU’I MYU GU NAS LA SOGS LAS DE LTA
MIN ZHE NA,

		Now suppose someone says
		“We specify anything
		Which can be created,
		As such, as the result.

		And anything which is
		Capable of producing
		Is a cause, even if
		It is something other.

		A rice sprout grows
		From what is incorporated
		Into a single flow,

		And from something
		That does function
		To produce it.

		As such, it is not something
		That can grow, in the same way,
		From barley or the like.”			


[1332]
DANG PO NI, ‘DIR SMRAS PA RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS LA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID KYANG YOD LA, THAMS CAD LAS THAMS CAD ‘BYUNG BA YANG MIN TE, RGYU ‘BRAS SO SOR NGES PA MTHONG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here is the first.  Now suppose someone comes and says the following:

First of all, it is certainly the case that there is a difference—and a difference which exists in & of itself—between a cause and its result, where one is something other than the other.  Even so, it is not the case that all objects would then arise from all other objects.  And this is because we can see with our own eyes that certain causes are always connected to certain results.


[1333]
DE YANG ‘DI YIN TE GANG GI PHYIR DNGOS PO GANG ZHIG GANG GIS RAB TU BYA BAR NUS PA DE NYID DE YI ‘BRAS BUR NGES PAR BRJOD PA YIN LA, DE’I PHYIR ‘BRAS BU NGES SO,,

And here’s how this works.  We specify any particular thing which can be created by any other particular thing as the result of that same thing.  As such, the result is specific to its cause.


[1334]
DE PHYIR ZHES PA ‘GREL PA DANG MI MTHUN NO,,

Shortening the “as such” to “and so” here fails to match the autocommentary.


[1335]
RGYU GANG ZHIG ‘BRAS BU DE SKYED PAR NUS PA DE NI NGO BOS GRUB PA’I GZHAN YIN NA’ANG RGYU YIN LA, DE’I PHYIR RGYU NGES SO,,

They continue with:

And anything which is a cause and which is capable of producing a result is a cause, even if it happens to be something which exists by its own essence, and is other than the result; as such, the cause is specific.


[1336]
DES NA GZHAN KHYAD PAR BA KHO NAS RGYU ‘BRAS SU ‘JOG GI ,GZHAN NYID KYI SPYI GZHAN TZAM GYIS NI RGYU ‘BRAS SU MI ‘JOG GO

Therefore, things are established as causes and effects of each other only by virtue of being a particular thing which is other than the other; it is not as if we establish things as cause & effect only by virtue of their being distinct from each other—as displaying some general form of otherness.


[1337]
,GZHAN YANG SA LU’I MYU GU NI RANG DANG RGYUD GCIG TU GTOGS PA SA LU’I SA BON LAS SKYE’I, RGYUD MI GCIG PA NAS KYI SA BON SOGS LAS MI SKYE’O,,

Moreover, the case is that a rice sprout grows from the rice seed which is incorporated with it into a single flow; it’s not as if a sprout could grow from a seed or whatever which were not included into the same flow.


[1338]
RGYUD GCIG KYANG SKYED BYED MIN PA SKAD CIG MA PHYI MAS SNGA MA MI SKYED PAS, RGYUD GCIG PA’I SNGA MAS PHYI MA SKYED PAR BYED PA LAS SKYE BA DE YI PHYIR, SA LU’I MYU GU NI NAS LA SOGS PA LAS NAS KYI MYU GU LA SOGS PA SKYE BA DE [f. 102b] LTAR SKYE BA MIN PAS THAMS CAD LAS THAMS CAD MI SKYE’O ZHE NA,

Even if they are incorporated into a single flow, a later instant of an object—which is not something which is functioning to produce the certain thing—cannot produce an earlier instant of the same object.  Rather, the case is that the object of the later instant grows from the object of the earlier instant included into the same flow—from something that does function to produce it.  As such, a rice sprout is not something that can grow from a barley seed or the like, in the same way that a barley sprout or such does.  Thus it is not the case that everything there is grows from everything else there is.



Entirely other,
with none of
four qualities

[1339]
GNYIS PA NI, SA LU’I SA MYUG SO SOR NGES PA ‘DI GO RGYU MTSAN GANG LAS YIN ZHES RGYU ‘BRAS NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAR SMRA BA ‘DI LA ‘DRI BAR BYA’O,,

This brings us to the second step from above, where we deny this response.  Here we ask the following question to those who say that causes and results exist in & of themselves: “What exactly is the reason you give for this position you’ve expressed—that the seeds and the sprouts of rice are specific to each other?”


[1340]
SMRAS PA NGES PA MTHONG BA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

And suppose the other side answers: “Well yes, we’ll tell you why: We can see, with our own eyes, that the two are specific to each other.”


[1341]
YANG CI’I PHYIR DE LTAR NGES PA MTHONG ZHES DE LTAR BRGAL ZHING BRTAGS PA NA,

And suppose we question them on this point, and dig deeper into it, asking: “Well just why is it that you can see, with your own eyes, that they are specific to each other?”


[1342]
GANG GI PHYIR NGES PA MTHONG BA DE’I PHYIR NGES PA MTHONG NGO ZHES DE TZAM ZHIG SMRA BA

And then all they can reply is, “Well, we can see that the cause & effect are specific to each other, because we can see that they’re specific to each other.”


[1343]
‘DIS NI NGES PA’I RGYU MA BSTAN PAR BSHAD ZIN PA’I NYES PA CUNG ZAD KYANG SPANG BAR MI NUS SO, ZHES GSUNGS TE,

And our answer to this is, “But this reply doesn’t help even the least bit to address the problem we’ve already raised—that it doesn’t present any reason why the two are specific to one another.”


[1344]
RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GZHAN YIN KYANG NGES PA MTHONG BA MI ‘GAL BA’I RGYU MTSAN MA BSTAN PAS SKYON SPONG GI LAN MIN ZHES PA’O,,

What we’re saying then is that this is not a response which eliminates the problems we’ve raised; it doesn’t provide any reason why it would not be a contradiction to say that—even though the seed and the sprout are, by definition, something other than each other—we still observe that they are particular to one another.


[1345]
GZHAN YANG RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID RGYU ‘BRAS YIN MIN KUN LA THUN MONG BA KHYAD PAR DU YONGS SU MA BCAD PA SHIN TU GRAGS PA ‘DI NYID, PHYIR RGOL ‘DI’I ‘DOD PA LA GNOD BYED DO ZHES BSHAD PA NI,

Moreover, it is absolutely common knowledge that if two things were other than each other in a way that existed by definition, then that difference could not be denied in the specific instance of the common group of each & every other object, whether they were cause & effect or not.  This fact, the root text says next, draws into question the entire position here of the other party.


	[1346]
[VI.16]
Iṣṭā yathā na janakā na ca śakti yuktā
naivaika santati gatāḥ sadṛśā na caiva,
Śālyaṅkurasya yava kesara kiṃ śukādyā
no śāli bījam api tasya tathā paratvāt.

,JI LTAR NAS DANG GE SAR DANG NI KENG SHU
KA LA SOGS,
,S’A LU’I MYU GU’I SKYED PAR BYED PAR ‘DOD MIN
NUS LDAN MIN,
,RGYUD GCIG KHONGS SU GTOGS MIN ‘DRA BA MA YIN
NYID DE BZHIN,
,S’A LU’I SA BON YANG NI DE YI MIN TE
GZHAN NYID PHYIR,

		Take barley; and filaments;
		The flame of the forest;
		Or anything of the like.
	
These are not at all things
That we could ever agree
Act to produce a rice sprout,
Nor do they possess the capacity;

They are not included in a single flow,
Nor are they the same.

Just so, neither is the rice seed
For it; because it is entirely other.


[1347]
JI LTAR TE DPER NA NAS DANG PAD+MA LA SOGS PA’I ZE’U ‘BRU GE SAR DANG KENG SHU KA’I ME TOG LA SOGS PA RNAMS GZHAN YIN PA’I PHYIR,

Let’s take, for example, a grain of barley; the filaments for the anther of a lotus or similar flower; the bloom of a flame-of-the-forest tree, or anything else of the like.  All these are things that are other than rice.


[1348]
SA LU’I MYU GU’I SKYED PAR BYED PAR ‘DOD PA MIN PA DANG, SA LU’I MYU GU SKYED PA’I NUS PA DANG LDAN PA MIN PA DANG, RGYUD GCIG TU GTOGS PA MIN PA DANG RIGS ‘DRA BA’I SNGA MA MA YIN PA NYID

Therefore they are (1) not at all things that we could agree act to produce a rice sprout; (2) nor do they possess the capacity to ever produce such a sprout.  They are (3) not things that are included into a single flow with a rice sprout; (4) nor are they preceding entitites that are of the same type as this kind of sprout.


[1349]
DE BZHIN DU, SA LU’I SA BON YANG NI SA LU’I MYU GU DE LA LTOS PA YI KHYAD PAR BZHI DANG LDAN PA MIN TE, RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Just so, neither is the rice seed something which possesses these four qualities relative to it—to the rice sprout—because it is, in & of itself, something entirely other than the sprout.


[1350]
‘DI YANG ‘BREL MED DON GZHAN LA KHYAD PAR BZHI YOD MED KYANG [f. 103a] GZHAG PAR MI NUS PA’I RIGS PA’O,,

This is a type of logic for demonstrating that—whether those four qualities held or not—we cannot establish a cause & effect relationship with things that are completely different and unrelated.



A more particular denial
of otherness

[1351]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, RGYU ‘BRAS SNGA PHYI BA LA GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA, RGYU ‘BRAS DUS MNYAM PA LA GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA’O,,

Which brings us to our second step from before: a more particular denial that things could grow from something other than themselves.  This we present in two parts of its own: denying that things could grow from something other than themselves, in the case of a cause and its effect which are successive; and then denying that things could grow from something other in a case where cause & effect were simultaneous.


[1352]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O,,

The first of these, in turn, comes in two points: the actual point; and then refuting attempted rebuttal of our denial.


	[1353]
[VI.17]
Astyaṅkuraś ca na hi bīja samāna kālo
bījaṃ kutaḥ parata yāstu vinā paratvam,
Janmāṅkurasya na hi sidhyati tena bījāt
saṃtyajyatāṃ parata udbhavatīti pakṣaḥ.

,MYU GU SA BON DANG NI DUS MNYAM YOD PA
MA YIN TE,
,GZHAN NYID MED PAR LA {%SA} BON GZHAN PA NYID DU
GA LA ‘GYUR,
,DES NA MYU GU SA BON LAS SKYE ‘GRUB PAR [205a]
‘GYUR MIN PAS,
,GZHAN LAS SKYE BA YIN ZHES BYA BA’I PHYOGS ‘DI
GTANG BAR BYOS,

		It is not the case
		That the sprout and seed
		Exist at the same time;
	
		If they cannot be
		Totally other,
		Then how could the seed
		Be something entirely other?

		Neither, therefore,
		Is it the case
		That the birth of a sprout
		From a seed could be [f. 205a].

		As such, we implore you
		To relinquish this position,
		Where you claim that things
		Grow from something other.			


[1354]
DANG PO NI, DE LTAR RE ZHIG PHYIR RGOL GZHAN LA GRAGS PA’I RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN GRUB GRUB LTAR BRJOD NAS SUN ‘BYIN BYAS SO, ,DE NI RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS LA NGO BOS GRUB PA’I GZHAN MI SRID PAR BSHAD PA,

Here’s the first; we will begin with describing how, as if it were possible, things could exist as something other than other things, in a way which existed in & of itself—as the other party here declares it would be.  And then we’ll demolish this idea.  That in itself would involve explaining why it’s impossible for causes and their results to be, through some essence of their own, other than each other.


[1355]
‘DI NA BYAMS PA DANG NYER SBAS YOD BZHIN PA DAG KHO NA PHAN TSUN LTOS NAS, ‘DI NI ‘DI LAS ZHES GZHAN NYID DU MTHONG GI ,MYU GU SA BON DANG NI DUS MNYAM DU YOD PA MA YIN TE, SA BON RNAM PAR MA ‘GYUR BAR MYU GU MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here we can say that John and Joe, first of all, are entities which exist.  And then—only with regard to them—we say that, relative to each other, we can observe that “this one is something completely different from that one.”  It is not though the case that the sprout exists at the same time as the seed; for there is no such thing as a sprout which is present before the seed is transformed.


[1356]
SA BON LA MYU GU LAS NGO BOS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID MED LA, DE MED PAR SA BON MYU GU LAS GZHAN PA NYID DU GA LA ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR RO,,

As for the seed as well, there exists none which is something totally other than the sprout, in a way where this is true in & of itself.  And if that cannot be, then how on earth could the seed ever be something entirely other than the sprout?  Meaning—it could never be so.


[1357]
NGO BOS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID MED PA DES NA MYU GU SA BON LAS SKYES PA NGO BO NYID KYIS ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR BA MIN PAS DNGOS PO RNAMS GZHAN LAS SKYE BA YIN ZHES BYA BA’I PHYOGS ‘DI GTANG BAR BYOS SHIG

And since there could never be any quality where things were other than each other in a way that existed in & of itself, it is therefore neither the case that the birth of a sprout from a seed could be something that existed through some essential nature of its own.  As such, we would implore you to relinquish this position, where you claim that things are such that they grow from something other than themselves.


[1358]
,’DI NI SA BON MYU GU LAS THA DAD PA DE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YIN NA, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA LA DUS NAM YANG LDOG PA MED PAS, SA BON GYI DUS NA’ANG MYU GU LAS RDZAS THA DAD DU ‘GYUR LA, DE LTAR DE GNYIS DUS MNYAM DU ‘GYUR BA LAS DE MED PA’I PHYIR,

The point being made here is this.  Suppose that the fact that a seed was distinct from a sprout were something that existed through some nature of its own.  Now a thing that existed through its own nature could never be stopped; as such, even in the seed’s time it would be substantially distinct from the sprout—whereas if that were the case, then the seed & sprout would have to be simultaneous, while in fact they are not.


[1359]
DE GNYIS LA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN MED CES STON PA YIN GYI, RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS THA SNYAD DU NGO BO THA DAD DU ‘DOD PA [f. 103b] ‘GOG PA MIN TE, DGAG BYA LA GTUG PA SHES DGOS SO,,

All this is teaching us that—with regard to these two—there is no quality of being other than each other, in a way which exists through some essence of its own.  What we are not denying here though is the belief that causes & effects are, in name only, entities that are discrete from each other.  You need to try understand here that the argument is meant to address that non-existent thing which emptiness is empty of.



The mistaken metaphor
of the arms of a scale

[1360]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point here: refuting attempted rebuttal of our denial.  


	[1361]
	[VI.18]
Antadvayasya namanonnamane tulāyā
dṛṣṭe yathā na khalu naiva samāna kāle,
Syātāṃ tathā janaka janya nirodha jātī
yadyekadā tad asad atra vinaika kālam.

,JI LTAR SRANG GI MDA’ GNYIS MTHO BA DANG NI
DMA’ BA DAG
,DUS MNYAM MA YIN PAR NA {%NI} MIN PAR MTHONG BA
DE BZHIN DU,
,BSKYED PAR BYA DANG SKYED BYED DAG GI SKYE ‘GAG
‘GYUR ZHE NA,
,GAL TE GCIG TSE YIN NA ‘DIR DUS GCIG MED
DE YANG MIN,

Now the others may claim:
“We can observe
How the arms of a scale
Rising & descending,

These two, are not such
That they do not occur
At the same time.

The growth & the ending
Of what is produced,
And what does the producing,
Occur too in a similar way.”

This idea though is not correct;
Even given that these two
Are concurrent,
There would not be here
Simultaneity.				


[1362]
MYU GU SA BON DANG NI DUS MNYAM YOD PA MA YIN TE, ZHES SMRAS PA NI RIGS PA MA YIN TE, JI LTAR TE DPER NA SRANG GI MDA’ GNYIS KYI GCIG MTHO BA DANG NI CIG SHOS DMA’ BA DAG DUS MNYAM MA YIN PAR NI MIN PA STE DUS MNYAM PAR MTHONG BA DE BZHIN DU, BSKYED PAR BYA BA MYU GU DANG SKYED BYED SA BON DAG GI RIM PA BZHIN DU SKYE BA DANG ‘GAG PA’I BYA BA GNYIS DUS GCIG YIN PA’I PHYIR,

Now the other party may come then and make the following claim:

It’s incorrect for you to say that “It is not the case that the sprout & seed exist at the same time.”  What’s actually the case is that that the gradual growth of what is produced—the sprout—and the gradual ending of what does the producing—the seed—are two events which occur within the same time.  This is similar to the way, similar to the metaphor, in which we observe that the rising of one of the two arms of a scale takes place simultaneous to the descending of the other arm; these two actions are not such that they do not occur at the same time.


[1363]
SA MYUG GNYIS KYANG DUS MNYAM PAR ‘GYUR RO, ,DE’I PHYIR GZHAN NYID YOD PAS NYES PA MED DO ZHE NA,

As such, the seed and the sprout too are things that occur at the same time; and this means that there does exist this condition of being perfectly other than each other.  And that in turn means that our position is free of the problems you’ve raised.


[1364]
SRANG GI DPES SA MYUG GNYIS KYI SKYE ‘JIG GI BYA BA GNYIS DUS GCIG TU RTOG NA DE NI MI RUNG STE, GAL TE SRANG GI DPER MGO MJUG GNYIS DUS GCIG YIN PAS MTHO DMAN GYI BYA BA GNYIS GCIG TSE STE DUS GCIG YIN NA, DE LTA NA’ANG DPES MTSON PA’I DON DNGOS ‘DIR NI SA MYUG DUS GCIG PA MED PAS MI RIGS SO,,

In reply, we would say though that this idea—that a scale can be used as a metaphor for conceptualizing the way in which the actions of a sprout and a seed growing & ending take place—is simply not correct.  Even suppose it’s a given that, in the metaphor of the scale, the two sides of the scale are simultaneous; and that, therefore, these two actions of one arm of the scale rising, and the other descending, are concurrent (which is to say, simultaneous).  Still it would not be the case that here in the actual situation represented by the metaphor, there would be any simultaneity of seed & sprout—that would be mistaken.



How there is no simultaneity

[1365]
JI LTAR MED PA DE LTAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Showing how this would not be the case is the purpose of the lines that come next.


	[1366]
[VI.19]
Janmonmukhaṃ na sad idaṃ yadi jāya mānaṃ
nāśonmukhaṃ sad api nāma niruddhya mānam,
Iṣṭaṃ tadā katham idaṃ tulayā samānaṃ
kartrā vinā janir iyaṃ na ca yukta rūpā.

,GAL TE SKYE BZHIN PA DE SKYE LA PHYOGS PAS
YOD MIN ZHING,
,’GAG BZHIN PA NI YOD KYANG ‘JIG LA PHYOGS PAR
‘DOD GYUR PA,
,DE TSE ‘DI NI JI LTA BUR NA SRANG DANG
MTSUNGS PA YIN,
,SKYE BA ‘DI NI BYED PO MED PAR RIGS PA’I
NGO BO’ANG MIN,

		Suppose that,
		In the act of growing,
		It is still approaching growth;
		And as such it is not
		Something that exists.

		There is though that
		Which is in the act of ending;
		But we treat it as something
		Approaching its destruction.

		How then in this moment
		Could it be that these
		Were the same as the scale?

		If the agent were absent,
		Then for this growing to exist
		Would be contrary
		To the very concept of logic.


[1367]
GAL TE SKYE BZHIN PA ZHES PA DE NI, DA LTA SKYE BA LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PA YIN PAS, MYU GU’I NGO BOR MA ‘ONGS PA’I PHYIR DA LTA YOD PA MIN ZHING, ‘GAG BZHIN PA NI YOD KYANG ‘JIGS LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PAR ‘DOD PAR GYUR PA’I PHYIR DA LTAR YOD PA’O,,

When it says here “Suppose it is in the act of growing,” the reference is to the sprout approaching, in the present moment, birth.  And because the sprout is at that point, its existing with the identity of a sprout is still something future; thus, the sprout is not something that exists in the present moment.  Now there is though that seed which is in the act of ending; but since we treat it as something approaching its destruction, we can say that it exists in the present moment.


[1368]
GANG GI TSE MYU GU SKYE BA LA PHYOGS PA’I DUS SU SA BON DA LTAR BA DANG, MYU GU MA ‘ONGS PA YIN PA DE’I TSE, SA MYUG GNYIS PO ‘DI NI JI LTA BUR NA SRANG GI MTHO DMAN GNYIS DANG MTSUNGS PAR [f. 104a] ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR TE,

So let’s consider this moment, in which the sprout is approaching growing; and in which the seed is in the present time, and the sprout in the future time.  How could it be then that these two—the seed & the sprout—were the same as the two arms of a scale; a pair where one is rising and the other is descending?  The fact is that they would not be the same.


[1369]
SRANG GI MGO MJUG GNYIS NI DA LTAR BA YIN PA’I PHYIR, DE’I MTHO BA DANG DMA’ BA’I BYA BA GNYIS KYANG DUS GCIG TU YOD KYI, SA MYUG GNYIS LA NI DUS GCIG PA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And that’s because—since the two sides of the scale are in the present time—the two actions of one arm rising and the other arm descending exist simultaneously; whereas in the case of the pair of the seed & the sprout, we have no simultaneity.


[1370]
DE DAG GIS NI BYA BA GNYIS DUS GCIG PAS SA MYUG GNYIS KYANG DUS GCIG PA DANG, DE’I DPER SRANG MDA’I MTHO DMAN GNYIS BKOD PA’I DPE MA GRUB PAR BSTAN GYI, BYA BA GNYIS LA DUS GCIG PA SRID NA DUS DER CHOS GNYIS KYANG NGES PAR DUS MNYAM ZHES STON PA MIN NO,,

What the lines here are indicating is only the incorrectness of the ideas that—just because the two actions are simultaneous—then the pair of the seed & the sprout must also be simultaneous; and that the metaphor of the arms of a scale rising & dropping could apply here.  They are not making the assertion that—if it is possible for two actions to be simultaneous—then the two objects involved must also be simultaneous.


[1371]
CI STE CHOS SA MYUG GNYIS LTA BU DUS GCIG PA MED KYANG DE GNYIS KYI BYA BA LA DUS GCIG PA YOD DO SNYAM NA,

The following thought then might occur to someone:

Now even if there is no simultaneity with the two objects—with things like the seed & the sprout—there can though exist simultaneity with actions involving the two.


[1372]
DE YANG MI RUNG STE RGOL BA DE DAG GIS CHOS LAS BYA BA DON GZHAN DU KHAS MA BLANGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, ‘DI NI BYA BA GNYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA’I SKABS YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This too though is mistaken, since these particular disputants do not accept the idea that action has an existence separate from the objects involved in the action; and, after all, this is a section of the text where we are disproving the idea that the two actions could exist through some nature of their own.


[1373]
SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE SKYE BA’I BYA BA LA LTOS PA’I BYED PA PO MYU GU NI, SKYE BA LA PHYOGS PA’I DUS SU MA ‘ONGS PA YIN PAS, DUS DER YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

And there is yet another problem here: the agent of the action, relative to the act of growing, is in fact the sprout—which in the moment of the growing is still future, and so is not something which exists in this moment.


[1374]
DER DE MED NA YANG RTEN BYED PA PO MYU GU MED PAR BRTEN PA SKYE BA’I BYA BA ‘DI NI YOD PAR RIGS PA’I NGO BO’ANG MIN PAS ‘GAG PA DANG DUS GCIG PAR MED PA’I PHYIR, BYA BA GNYIS DUS GCIG PAR MI RIGS SO,,

And if it is not something which exists yet—that is, if the basis of the action, the sprout (the agent), were absent—then for what rests upon this basis, this act of growing, to exist would be contrary to the very concept of logic.  As such, the growing could not be simultaneous to the ending; and therefore it would be incorrect to say that the two actions were simultaneous.


[1375]
GAL TE ‘PHAGS PA SA LU LJANG PA’I MDO LAS, SRANG MDA’I MTHO DMAN GYI TSUL DU SKAD CIG GANG KHO NA LA SA BON ‘GAGS PA DE NYID LA MYU GU SKYE’O, ZHES SRANG GI DPE ‘DI NYE BAR BKOD PA MA YIN NAM, DE’I PHYIR SA MYUG GNYIS [f. 104b] SRANG MDA’I MTHO DMAN DANG ‘DRA BAR ‘DOD PA ‘GOG PAR MI RIGS SO ZHE NA,

Someone may respond then with the following:

But doesn’t the sutra called A Sprout of Rice also utilize the metaphor of a scale, describing how in the very moment that the seed ends, the sprout grows, in the same way that the arms of a scale rise & descend?  Since that is indeed the case, isn’t it incorrect for you to deny that the pair of the seed & the sprout are similar to the rising & descending arms of the scale?


[1376]
BKOD PA NI BDEN MOD KYI DE NI GZHAN SKYE DANG, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS SKYE BA BSTAN PA’I PHYIR YANG MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS, GAL TE SKYE BA ‘DI NI ZHES PAS SKYE BA BKAG PA NI RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA’I SKYE BA TZAM BKAG GI ,SA BON LAS MYU GU SKYE BA TZAM ‘GOG PA GTAN MIN NO,,

We would have to admit that the metaphor is, in truth, presented in that sutra.  Remember though that “this is speaking neither of things growing from something other than themselves; nor is it speaking of growth which occurs by definition.”  As such, when the part about “suppose this growing” denies that things grow, it is only denying that things could grow through some essential nature of their own.  We are absolutely not denying that, in general, sprouts grow from seeds.


[1377]
‘O NA MDO DE LAS SA MYUG GNYIS DUS GCIG PA SRANG MDA’I MTHO DMAN GYI TSUL DU MI STON NA, DPE DE DUS MNYAM PA CI ‘DRA ZHIG LA DGONGS ZHE NA,

One might respond to this, in turn, with—

Well suppose you’re right, and that this sutra is not describing a simultaneity of the two of a seed and a sprout which is analogous to the rising and descending of the arms of a scale.  What kind of synchronicity then is this metaphor in the sutra meant to refer to?


[1378]
‘GREL PAR CIG CAR DU BRTEN NAS ‘BYUNG BA MA BRTAGS PAR GRUB PA SGYU MA LTA BU GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU GSUNGS PAR BSHAD PA’I CIG CAR DU BRTEN NAS ‘BYUNG BA ZHES PA NI, BYA BA GNYIS CIG CAR DU YOD PA LA BYA DGOS TE, MDO DER SRANG MDA’I MTHO DMA’I DPES DUS MNYAM PA GCIG STON DGOS PA LA, SO {%SA} MYUG GNYIS DUS MNYAM PA LA BSHAD DU MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Remember that the autocommentary goes on to say, “It is so that people can come to see clearly that—when these things occur altogether, and we choose not to examine how they occur altogether in a dependent relationship—then they exist in the same way that an illusion does.”  This statement must be read as describing how the two actions occur altogether.  That is, while it is true that the sutra must be explained as using the metaphor of the arms of a scale to describe a type of simultaneity, it would be mistaken to describe it as explaining why the two of seed and sprout were simultaneous.


[1379]
DES NA BYA BA GNYIS GCIG PA BKAG BA NI, RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I BYA BA GNYIS YIN GYI, BYA BA GNYIS SPYIR DUS MNYAM PA YOD PA BKAG PA MIN NO,,

Therefore the denial that the two actions occur at the same time is made with reference to the two as existing by definition; it is not the case that—in general—the idea that the two actions could be happening simultaneously is being refused.


[1380]
DE LA SKYE BA ‘DOD PHYIN CHAD RGYU ‘GAG PA DANG ‘BRAS BU SKYE BA LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PA GNYIS DUS MNYAM PA CIG DGOS SO,,

That is, once we agree that something grows, we must as well agree that the cause approaching its ending and the result approaching its growing are happening at the very same time.


[1381]
DE NI SKYE BA TZAM DANG THA SNYAD DU SKYE BA KHAS LEN PA LA MI RIGS PA MED KYANG, DON DAM PA DANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS SKYE BA KHAS LEN PA LA ‘GAL BA YIN TE, SNGA MA LA NI RGYU ‘BRAS KYI SKYE ‘GAG GI BYA BA [f. 105a] GNYIS DUS MNYAM YANG, RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS DUS MNYAM MI DGOS LA, PHYI MA LA NI BYA BA DUS MNYAM NA RGYU ‘BRAS KYANG DUS MNYAM DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The point being made here is that there is nothing at all wrong with accepting the idea of growing per se; or the idea of something growing in a nominal manner.  It would though be a contradiction to agree to the idea of growing that could occur in an ultimate way, or by definition.  In the former case, the two actions of the growing & stopping of the cause and the result would be simultaneous; nonetheless, this doesn’t have to imply that the cause and the result themselves are simultaneous.  In the latter case, cause & results would have to be simultaneous, if the actions involved were themselves simultaneous.


[1382]
‘DI LTAR ‘BRAS BU SKYE BA’I BYA BA NI ‘DI SKYE ZHES PA’I BYED PA PO MYU GU SOGS LA BRTEN DGOS PAS RTEN DANG BRTEN PA’O,,

When we talk here about a basis and something relying upon this basis, what we’re saying is that the result—the action of growing (“this growing”)—is something that must depend upon an agent doing the growing: such as the sprout.


[1383]
RTEN BRTEN PA DON DAM PAR GRUB NA NI RANG BZHIN GZHAN DU ‘GYUR BA MI ‘THAD PAS, DUS NAM GYI TSE YANG BYA BA RTEN DGOS PAS MYU GU SOGS SKYE BA LA PHYOGS PA’I DUS SU YANG, SKYE BA’I BYA BA’I RTEN DU MYU GU YOD DGOS PAS RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS DUS MNYAM DU ‘GYUR BA SOGS KYIS GNOD PAS MI ‘THAD DO,,

If the basis and what rests upon this basis existed in an ultimate way, then it would be incorrect to say that they possessed a nature which was different from each other.  Therefore, at the point in time when the action had to rely upon its own basis, then even at the juncture where the sprout or such was approaching its growth, there would have to be a sprout there to act as the basis which supported the action of growing.  This model would be drawn into question by a situation where, for example, the cause and its result were thus simultaneous; as such, it would have to be incorrect.


[1384]
THA SNYAD PA’I SKYE BA LA LAN CIG RTEN BRTEN PAR SONG NA DUS THAMS CAD DU ‘GRO MI DGOS PAS MI MTSUNGS SO,,

In a case where the growing was going on in a nominal manner, it would not have to hold that—if things in a single instance shared a relationship where one was a basis and the other was something resting upon that basis—this relationship would have to continue on in every possible other time.


[1385]
SA BON DANG DUS MNYAM PA’I MYU GU SKYE BA’I BYA BA NI, MYU GU SKYE BA LA PHYOGS PA’I BYA BA YIN LA, DE DANG MYU GU GNYIS SPYIR RTEN BRTEN PA YIN PA DANG, BYA BA DE’I DUS SU MYU GU MED KYANG BYA BA YOD PA MI ‘GAL BA NI,

When we say that the action of a sprout growing is simultaneous to the seed, we are talking about an action where the sprout is approaching growing.  It is no contradiction to say at this point that the two of this action and the sprout itself are, generally, acting as a basis & what rests upon this basis; while at the same time the action does exist, even though no sprout exists in the moment of this action.  And here’s why.


[1386]
DPER NA SPYIR ‘BREL YUL KHEGS NA ‘BREL PO LDOG PA DANG, SA BON ‘BREL YUL DANG MYU GU ‘BREL PO YIN PA DANG, MYU GU’I DUS NA SA BON LOG KYANG MYU GU MI LDOG PA MI ‘GAL BA BZHIN NO,,

It is for example no contradiction to say that if you cancel the thing that another thing shares a relationship with, then the thing that has the relationship is also stopped; and that here the seed is what the relationship is had with, while the sprout is what has the relationship; and that even if you stop the seed, in the time of the sprout, that the sprout need not be stopped.


[1387]
DE ‘DRA BA’I TSUL GYIS RIGS PAS PHAR LA BKAG PA DANG, BKAG PA’I RIGS PA RANG LA MI LDOG PA LEGS PAR SHES NAS DBU MA’I LUGS SKYON MED ‘JOG SHES NA DBU MA PA YIN GYI,

You need to have a good understanding of how to employ this method of using logic to disprove another’s position, even as you avoid having the logic you used to do the disproving being used against your own position afterwards.  That is, if you know how to set forth the position of the middle way without making any mistakes, you are a true member of the Middle Way school.


[1388]
‘GOG PA’I TSE LTAR SNANG ‘BA’ ZHIG SMRAS NAS, DE NYID TSUR LA BZLOG [f. 105b] PA’I TSE BSNYON ‘DINGS PA LA RE NA, KHO BO CAG SMYON PA DANG LHAN CIG TU MI RTZOD DO, ZHES TSIG GSAL LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR BYA’O,,

If rather you put your hopes in people who are deranged—who attempt to disprove the ideas of others but who, at the same time, employ only arguments which can be turned back upon their own positions—then all we can do is repeat the words of the Clarification of the Verses: “For our part, we refuse to debate with those who have lost their sanity.”



Simultaneous others
could never grow

GNYIS PA NI,

[1389]
This brings us to the second point in our more particular denial that things could grow from something other than themselves.  This is where we deny that things could grow from something other than themselves, in a case where cause & effect were simultaneous.


	[1390]
	[VI.20]
Cakṣur dhiyaḥ svajanakaiḥ khalu cakṣur ādyaiḥ
saṃjñādibhiś ca sahabhāvibhir ekakālaiḥ,
Anyatvam asti yadi kiṃ bhavanena satyāṃ
nāsyāḥ satītvam atha ced vihito’tra doṣaḥ.

,GAL TE MIG GI BLO LA RANG GI SKYE BYED
DUS GCIG PA,
,MIG LA SOGS DANG LHAN CIG ‘BYUNG BA ‘DU SHES
LA SOGS LAS,
,GZHAN NYID YOD NA YOD LA ‘BYUNG BAS DGOS PA
CI ZHIG YOD,
,CI STE DE MED CE NA ‘DI LA NYES PA BSHAD ZIN TO,

Suppose the eye and such
Which are what produce
And are simultaneous to
The awareness of the eye;

As well as the discrimination
And the like which occur
In conjunction,

Are—relative to it—
Perfectly other.

What purpose
Could possibly be served
By the occurrence of something
That already existed?

Suppose you say
That there is none;
We have already described
The problem with that case.				


[1391]
‘DIR SMRAS PA SA MYUG DUS MNYAM PA MED PAS, NGO BO NYID KYIS GZHAN NYID MED PA’I PHYIR GZHAN LAS SKYE BA MI RIGS NA,

Some people come and present something like this:

You’ve shown how it’s wrong to say that things grow from other things, because there is no such thing as things that are completely other than each other, through some essential nature of their own—which itself is true because there is no such thing as a seed & a sprout which are simultaneous.


[1392]
RGYU ‘BRAS DUS MNYAM PA YOD PA DER GZHAN NYID YOD PAS GZHAN SKYE YOD DE, DPER NA MIG GI RNAM SHES DANG DE DANG DUS MNYAM PA’I TSOR BA LA SOGS PA RNAMS LTA BU’O,,

But let’s take a situation where there is a simultaneity between the cause & the result; in this case, there can exist a complete difference between the two, and then there can be the growth of something from something other than itself.  We can take, for example, where feelings or the like are simultaneous to our visual awareness.


[1393]
MIG DANG GZUGS SOGS DANG TSOR BA SOGS LHAN CIG ‘BYUNG BA RNAMS DUS MNYAM PA KHO NAR MIG GI RNAM SHES SKYED PA DE BZHIN DU, MIG SOGS DANG SEMS KYANG DUS MNYAM KHO NAR TSOR BA LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI RKYEN YIN NO ZHES KHA CIG SMRA’O,,

Only in a case where the organ of the eye; and a visible object, or the like; and feelings and such occur altogether—only in a case where they are simultaneous—can visual awareness then grow.  Just so, it is only in a case where the eye and so forth, and the main mind, are as well simultaneous that they can serve as conditions for feelings & the like.


[1394]
GAL TE MIG GI BLO STE RNAM SHES LA RANG GI SKYED BYED RANG DANG DUS GCIG PA MIG LA SOGS PA DANG, DE DAG DANG LHAN CIG ‘BYUNG BA’I ‘DU SHES LA SOGS PA RNAMS RKYEN NYID DU RTOG NA, DE’I TSE ‘DU SHES SOGS LA BLTOS NAS GZHAN NYID YOD DU CHUG KYANG,

Suppose then that we do imagine that the eye and such which are what produce and which are simultaneous to the “awareness of the eye”—meaning the visual consciousness; as well as the capacity of discrimination and the like which occur in conjunction with this eye and so forth; are actually its conditions.  And suppose as well that we allow, at this point in time, that this consciousness exists—relative to the discrimination and so on—as something perfectly other.


[1395]
RGYU DUS NAS YOD PA LA SLAR YANG ‘BYUNG BAS DGOS PA CI ZHIG YOD DE CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PAS SKYE BA MED DO,,

What purpose though could possibly be served by the repeated occurrence of something that already existed in the time of the cause?  There is not the slightest point to it; as such, it doesn’t grow!


[1396]
CI STE SKYE BA MED PA’I SKYON SPANG BAR ‘DOD NAS RGYU DUS SU ‘BRAS BU DE MED DO ZHE NA, DE’I TSE SNGA PHYI BA ‘DI LA NGO BOS GRUB PA’I GZHAN MED PA’I NYES PA SNGAR BSHAD ZIN TO,,

Suppose then that the other party, hoping to avoid this problem that the awareness wouldn’t grow, says that there is no result in the time of the cause.  In that case there would come the problem that we already described earlier—with the case of a cause & result which were sequential—where there were no things that were other than each other, in a way where they existed through some essence of their own.


[1397]
DE LTAR NA RIGS PA ‘DIS NI RGYU ‘BRAS SU ‘DOD PA LA GZHAN NYID YOD KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MI SRID LA, DE’I PHYIR GZHAN LAS SKYE BA MI SRID PAR STON ZHING, RIGS PA SNGA MAS NI RGYU ‘BRAS LA SKYE BA SRID KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GZHAN YIN [f. 106a] PA MI SRID LA, DE’I PHYIR GZHAN SKYE MI SRID PAR STON TO,,

As such, what this reasoning is indicating is that you can accept cause & effect, and that there is such a thing where these are completely separate from one another, and yet still it is impossible for things to grow through some nature of their own—and so it is impossible for things to grow from something other than themselves.  The previous reasoning is indicating that—although it is possible for things to grow with cause & effect—it is impossible for these to be other than each other in a way that exists through some nature of its own; and that for this reason it is impossible for a thing to grow from something other than itself.


[1398]
DES NA GZHAN LAS SKYE BA YOD CES PA NI BRJOD BYA’I DON GYIS STONG PAS SONG SONG NAS, DE LTAR BRJOD PA’I SGRA ‘BA’ ZHIG LHAG MAR LUS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And so you can keep on repeating that there is such a thing as things growing from something other than themselves; but what you’re describing is devoid of any meaning at all—and thus what you’re saying is just another piece of sound in the world, and nothing more.



None of four possibilities

[1399]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third point from above: A denial that things could grow from something other than themselves accomplished by examining four possible permutations.


	[1400]
[VI.21]
Janyaṃ paraṃ ca janayej janakaḥ sa hetuḥ
sad vātha cāsad ubhayaṃ vigata dvayaṃ vā,
Sac cet kim asya janakair asato’pi kiṃ tair
dvaite’pi taiḥ kim atha kiṃ vigata dvaye taiḥ.

,SKYED PAR ‘BYED PA BSKYED BYA GZHAN SKYED PA DE
RGYU YIN NA,
,YOD PA’AM ‘ON TE MED DANG GNYI GA GNYIS BRAL
ZHIG SKYED GRANG,
,YOD NA SKYED BYED CI DGOS MED LA’ANG DES NI
CI ZHIG BYA,
,GNYIS NYID LA DES CI BYA GNYIS DANG BRAL LA’ANG
DES CI BYA,

		Suppose something produces
		Something produced;
		And what it produces
		Is something other.

		Let’s calculate whether
		That exists; or else does not;
		Or both; or is devoid of either.

		Suppose it existed;
		Then what need would there be
		For what acted to produce it?

		And if on the other hand
		It did not exist,
		Then what would it do for it?

		If both, what would it do?
		And if it were devoid,
		What again could it do?


[1401]
SKYED PAR BYED PA BSKYED BYA RANG LAS GZHAN SKYED PA DE RGYU YIN NA, RGYU DES ‘BRAS BU RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA’AM, ‘ON TE MED PA DANG, YOD MED GNYIS KA DANG, YOD MED GNYIS KA DANG BRAL BA ZHIG SKYED GRANG STE BRTAG GO

Suppose you have something that produces another thing—something produced—and that what it produces is something other than itself.  Let’s calculate, let’s examine, whether—when something is a cause like this—this cause produces a result which exists through some nature of its own; or else one which does not exist such; or one which both does & does exist thus; or one which is devoid of either existing or not existing, in this manner.


[1402]
,DE LA RE ZHIG ‘BRAS BU RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD NA DE LA SKYED BYED KYI RKYEN CI ZHIG DGOS TE MI DGOS TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA SKYE NA SKYES ZIN SLAR YANG SKYE BAR ‘GYUR LA, DE YANG MI RIGS PAR BSTAN ZIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Suppose, in the first place, that the result here existed through some nature of its own; in that case, what need would there be for a condition that acted to produce it?  There would in fact be no such need; for if something grew which existed by nature, then something that had already grown would have to grow all over again—and we have already described how that would be illogical.


[1403]
‘BRAS BU MED PA LA’ANG RKYEN DES CI ZHIG BYA STE, BONG BU’I RVA LTAR MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And even if the result did not exist, then what would the condition ever do for it?  For it would not exist—it would be like rabbit antlers.


[1404]
YOD MED GNYIS KA TSOGS PA NYID LA RKYEN DES CI ZHIG BYA STE, DE GNYIS TSOGS PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And suppose the result were a combination of both something that existed, and something that didn’t exist.  What would the condition ever do for it then?  After all, something which combined both would already be an impossibility.


[1405]
YOD MED GNYIS KA DANG BRAL BA DE LA’ANG RKYEN DES CI ZHIG BYA STE, DE GNYIS GANG YANG MIN PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And what, finally, could a condition do for a result that was devoid of both existence & non-existence?  For a thing which was neither of these would as well be an impossibility.



What the world sees is proof

[1406]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, ‘JIG RTEN GYI GRAGS PAS GZHAN SKYE KHAS BLANGS NAS ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA SPANG BA, ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD DU YANG GZHAN SKYE MED PAS ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA SPANG BA’O,,

We’ve reached now our second topic from above: overcoming objections which say that the denial that things could grow from something other than themselves in any way contradicts the beliefs of the everyday world.  We cover this in two steps: overcoming objections relating to the everyday world which say that—in the conventions of the world—the idea that things grow from something other than themselves is accepted; and then overcoming such objections which say that there is no growth of things from something other than themselves, even in the parlance of the world.


[1407]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PA’I RTZOD PA DANG, DES MI GNOD PA’I LAN BSTAN PA’O,,

The first of these steps has two parts of its own: arguments which present how we’ve contradicted the beliefs of the everyday world; and the presentation of a reply to these arguments, which shows how we have not in fact contradicted these beliefs.


	[1408]
[VI.22]
Yuktyā kim atra khalu varṇitayā kriyeta
lokaḥ sthitaḥ svadṛśi yena mataḥ pramāṇam,
Lokaś ca nāma parataḥ parabhāvam eti
tenāsti janma parataḥ kim ihopapattyā.

,GANG GIS RANG LTA LA GNAS ‘JIG RTEN TSAD MAR
‘DOD PAS NA,
,’DIR NI RIGS PA SMRAS PA NYID KYIS LTA KO
CI ZHIG BYA,
,GZHAN LAS GZHAN ‘BYUNG BA YANG ‘JIG RTEN PA YIS
RTOGS ‘GYUR TE,
,DES NA GZHAN LAS SKYE YOD ‘DIR NI RIGS PA
CI ZHIG DGOS,

		Those who remain
		With their own viewpoints
		Consider the world accurate;

		What could possibly be here
		The use of articulating
The point with this logic?

		What people of the world
		Perceive is that things issue
		From things which are
Other than them.

What purpose would
The logic for this be—
For the fact that things do grow
From things that are other?


[1409]
DANG PO NI, GAL TE GZHAN SKYE GRUB PA’I PHYIR DU RIGS PA GANG SMRAS PA DE NI, BUD SHING SKAM PO MAR GYIS BRAN PA LTAR KHYOD KYI BLO GROS KYI MES MA LUS PAR [f. 106b] BSREGS PAS, KHYOD KYI SHES RAB KYI ME SBOR BA’I RIGS PA’I BUD SHING BSKUL BA DES CHOG GI DA DE BSKUL MI DGOS SO,,

Here is the first.  The other party may come and make the following statement:

Any argument that someone could present to prove the idea that things grow from something other than themselves is like pouring ghee on dry wood: the flames of your intellect consume everything.  It’s enough that you have the fuel of the firewood of clear thinking, to feed the fire of wisdom; we need no further fuel than that.


[1410]
‘O NA RIGS PA MA BSTAN PAR GZHAN SKYE ‘DOD PA’I DON MI ‘GRUB PA MA YIN NAM ZHE NA,

And you may ask us: “But if you cannot present any logic to help, how are you going to prove this idea—the belief you have that things could grow from something other than themselves?”


[1411]
DE NI MA YIN TE GANG ZHIG ‘JIG RTEN LAS GRUB PA DER NI, RIGS PA GZHAN GYIS CI YANG BYA BA MED DE, ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA NI SHIN TU STOBS DANG LDAN PA’I PHYIR RO ZHES BSHAD PA,

The fact is that no such logic is needed.  Once something has been established in the everyday world, there’s nothing else to be achieved throught the use of further reasoning.  And that’s because what the world sees with its own eyes has overwhelming authority.

And so the purpose of the lines that come next in the root text is to express this sentiment.  


[1412]
GANG GIS ‘JIG RTEN PA THAMS CAD RANG GI LTA BA KHO NA LA GNAS NAS, ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA TSAD MAR ‘DOD PAS NA SHIN TU STOBS DANG LDAN ZHING, NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I RGYU GZHAN LAS ‘BRAS BU GZHAN ‘BYUNG BA YANG ‘JIG RTEN PA RNAMS KYIS MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR TE,

Suppose then that someone comes & says,

Those—meaning all the people of the everyday world—who remain only with their own viewpoints consider what the world sees as accurate perception; that is, this is what they consider authoritative.  And what people of the world perceive, directly, is that results issue from causes which are other than them, and which exist in & of themselves.


[1413]
RIGS PA’I ‘THAD PA YANG NYE BAR ‘GOD PA NA, MNGON SUM DU GYUR MA GYUR GNYIS LAS GNYIS PA LA ‘GOD PA YIN LA, DANG PO NI, MNGON SUM TSAD MAS GRUB PA’I PHYIR DE LA ‘THAD PA ‘GOD PA MA YIN NO,,

When a person presents a justification utilizing logic, this could either be done in a case where direct perception is involved, or where it is not.  In the first of these two choices, things have already been established by virtue of a direct form of accurate perception; as such, we do not in this case present logical justifications.


[1414]
DE’I PHYIR GZHAN SKYE YOD PA ‘DIR NI, DE YOD PAR SGRUB PA’I RIGS PA GZHAN SMRAS PA NYID KYIS LTA KO CI ZHIG BYA,

Given that—here in this exercise of establishing the existence of things growing from things that are other than themselves—what could possibly be the use of  articulating the point with this additional logic for its existence?


[1415]
DES NA GZHAN SKYE’I SGRUB BYED KYI ‘THAD PA GZHAN MED PAR YANG, DNGOS PO RNAMS GZHAN LAS SKYE BA ‘GRUB PAS, GZHAN LAS SKYE BA YOD PA ‘DIR NI RIGS PA GZHAN BSTAN PAS DGOS PA CI ZHIG YOD DE MED DE, MNGON SUM GYIS GRUB PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

As such—even though there is no other justification used to establish, logically, the fact that things grow from things other than themselves—we nonetheless establish that entitites do, indeed, grow from other entities.  What purpose then would be served by presenting any further logic for this—for the fact that things do grow from things other than themselves?  There would be no such purpose, for this fact is established by our own direct perception.



Contradicting what the world says—or not

[1416]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to the second part from above: a reply to these arguments, meant to show that we have not in fact contradicted the beliefs of the world.


[1417]
GANG ZHIG GSUNG RAB KYI DON PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR MA RTOGS SHING, ‘KHOR BA THOG MA MED PA NAS DNGOS PO BDEN ‘DZIN GYI BAG CHAGS [f. 107a] BZHAG PA SMIN PA LAS BYUNG BA’I DNGOS PO LA BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA YUN RING MO NAS ‘DRIS PA’I MDZA’ BO DANG BRAL BA STE,

And so there are those who have yet to grasp the meaning of the highest of all words in an unerring way; in their hearts, the deep seeds for believing that things are real have been sown, for time with no beginning, here in the cycle of pain.  These seeds have ripened, and produced a craving for believing that things are real—and these people must learn to leave behind this friend, who has been so close to them, for so very long.


[1418]
‘BRAL BAR BYED PA’I THABS RANG BZHIN MED PA’I TSUL YANG DANG YANG DU THOS PA DANG BRAL BA, ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA’I RDOL THABS TE BLA BRDOL LA BRTEN PA ‘DI NI, ‘JIG RTEN GYI BYUNG TSUL MANG PO CIG MA BSHAD PAR ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA’I BLA BRDOL LAS BZLOG PAR MI NUS PAS, 

The way to leave the friend behind is to hear teaching, again & again, on how things have no nature of their own—but these friends have had no such teaching.  And now they babble about what contradicts what the world sees; they are delivering themselves to meaningless chatter.  In so doing, they will never be able to battle the blather that truly hurts the world—they are missing the many details of what really brought this world of pain into being.


[1419]
YUL ‘DI ‘DRA BA ZHIG LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD DO ZHES DE’I GNOD YUL KHYAD PAR CAN DANG, YUL ‘DI ‘DRA BA LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS MI GNOD DO ZHES MI GNOD PA’I YUL KHYAD PAR CAN BSTAN DGOS SO,,

And so what we need to do, here & now, is to identify for them that specific part of the world they are contradicting when we say “the world contradicts this particular aspect”; and the specific part of the world they are not contradicting, when we say “the world does not contradict this aspect.”


[1420]
DE LA BDEN PA GNYIS KYI RNAM DBYE BSTAN PA SNGON DU ‘GRO BA DGOS PA LA LNGA, BDEN PA GNYIS KYI SPYI’I RNAM GZHAG, SKABS KYI DON LA SBYAR BA, BDEN GNYIS SO SO’I NGO BO BSHAD PA, BKAG PA LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PA LA GNOD BYED BSTAN PA, ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PA’I GNOD TSUL BSTAN PA’O,,

To accomplish this, we must first give a presentation of a certain division of things—into two kinds of reality.  We’ll make this presentation in five steps:

 A general presentation of the two realities
 How to apply this presentation to the present topic
 A separate explanation of the nature of each of the two realities
 A demonstration that there are contradictions in the idea that 
	our denial of growth from something other is contradicted
	by the perceptions of the world
 A presentation on the way in which the perceptions of the world
	would in fact be contradicted.


[1421]
DANG PO LA BZHI, BDEN GNYIS SU DBYE BAS CHOS RNAMS LA NGO BO GNYIS GNYIS YOD PAR BRJOD PA, BDEN GNYIS KYI RNAM BZHAG GZHAN BSTAN PA, ‘JIG RTEN LA BLTOS TE KUN RDZOB KYI DBYE BA BSHAD PA, ZHEN YUL LA ‘KHRUL BA’I ZHEN YUL THA SNYAD DU YANG MED PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

The first of these has four parts of its own:

	 A statement about how all objects each possess two different
		natures, given the division into two realities
	 A description of other ways in which the two realities
		are set forth
	 An explanation of the divisions of deceptive reality,
		relative to the everyday world
	 Demonstrating that—when we are mistaken towards the
		object we think we see—this object that we believe in
		does not even exist nominally.



The two natures
of every existing thing

[1422]
DANG PO NI,

We begin with the way in which objects have two natures.


	[1423]
[VI.23]
Samyag mṛṣā darśana labdha bhāvaṃ
rūpa dvayaṃ bibhrati sarva bhāvāḥ,
Samyag dṛśāṃ yo viṣayaḥ sa tattvaṃ
mṛṣā dṛśāṃ saṃvṛti satyam uktam.

,DNGOS KUN YANG DAG BRDZUN PA MTHONG BA YIS,
,DNGOS RNYED NGO BO GNYIS NI ‘DZIN PAR ‘GYUR,
,YANG DAG MTHONG YUL GANG DE DE NYID DE,
,MTHONG BA BRDZUN PA KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR GSUNGS,

All objects involve
Two different natures:
Objects discovered
By seeing what is pure
And what is a lie.

It was declared that the one
Which serves as the object
When we see the pure
Is suchness;

And that seen to be a lie
Is deceptive reality.


[1424]
‘DI NA BDEN GNYIS KYI RANG GI NGO BO PHYIN CI MA LOG PA MKHYEN PA’I BCOM LDAN ‘DAS RNAMS KYIS ‘DU BYED SEMS PA SOGS NANG DANG MYU [f. 107b] GU SOGS PHYI ROL GYI DNGOS PO KUN TE THAMS CAD KYI RANG GI NGO BO RNAM PA GNYIS NI ‘DZIN PAR ‘GYUR BAR NYE BAR BSTEN TE, DE GANG ZHE NA, KUN RDZOB BDEN PA’I NGO BO DANG DON DAM BDEN PA’I NGO BO’O,,

For this, let us consider the Conqueror, who possesses high & unerring knowledge of the nature of each of the two realities.  He imparts to us the understanding of how all objects—each & every one of them—involve two different types of natures of their own, whether they are inner entitites such as the thought to apply an antidote; or outer entitites such as a sprout.  What are these two natures?  One nature belongs to deceptive reality; and the other belongs to ultimate reality.


[1425]
‘DIS NI MYU GU LTA BU GCIG GI NGO BO LA YANG PHYE NA KUN RDZOB YIN PA DANG, DON DAM PA’I NGO BO GNYIS YOD PAR STON GYI MYU GU’I NGO BO GCIG NYID SO SKYE DANG ‘PHAGS PA LA BLTOS NAS BDEN PA GNYIS SU BSTAN PA GTAN MIN NO,,

The point we are making here is that—if we take a single object such as a sprout, and make a division of its essential nature—then we would find that it possesses a nature both of being a deceptive object, and of having an ultimate side.  What we are absolutely not saying here though is that a single nature of a sprout possesses two realities, relative to common beings & realized beings.


[1426]
DE LTAR BYAS NA NGO BO MED PA’I CHOS MI SRID PAS, GZHI GRUB PA YIN NA NGO BO GCIG DANG THA DAD LAS MI ‘DA’ LA, NGO BO YOD PA KHAS LEN KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I NGO BO MED PA MI ‘GAL LO,,

Given all this, then—since an existing entity without any essential nature at all is an impossibility—we can say that once a thing exists, it possesses either one single essential nature, or else some separate natures: there is no other possibility.  At the same time, it is no contradiction to say that an object possesses an essential nature, but lacks any essential nature which exists through some nature of its own.


[1427]
DE LA MYU GU LA SOGS PA’I DNGOS PO’I NGO BO DON DAM PA NI, YANG DAG PA’I DON MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA RNAMS KYI YE SHES KYI KHYAD PAR GYI YUL NYID KYIS BDAG GI RANG GI NGO BO RNYED PA YIN GYI, RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS GRUB PA NI MA YIN TE, ‘DI NI NGO BO GNYIS BSHAD PA’I GCIG YIN NO,,

Let’s look at the ultimate nature possessed by objects such as a sprout.  This is an essential nature of these objects which is discovered by the exceptional wisdom of those who see, directly, pure reality: and it is discovered through a self-nature of this one object.  Even given that, this ultimate nature though is not something which exists in & of itself.  This then is one of the two natures we’ve alluded to.


[1428]
YE SHES KYI KHYAD PAR ZHES PA NI ‘PHAGS PA’I YE SHES GANG YIN GYIS RNYED PA MIN PAR YE SHES KYI KHYAD PAR TE BYE BRAG PA ZHIG LA BYED DE, DE YANG JI LTA BA ‘JAL BA’I YE SHES KYIS RNYED PA’O,,

When we speak here of an “exceptional” or particular form of wisdom, what we’re saying is that this nature is something which is discovered by the wisdom which is one that belongs to a realized being; that is to say, we are referring to a particular type or genre of wisdom in general.  We can also say that this nature is “discovered by the wisdom which takes the way things really are under consideration.”


[1429]
YE SHES DES RNYED PA’AM GRUB PAR BSTAN PA NA DES GRUB RGYU ZHIG BYUNG NA BDEN GRUB BO ZHES ‘DZIN PA DGAG PA’I PHYIR, RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS GRUB PA NI MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS

When we say that this nature is “discovered” or established by this wisdom, we say in the same breath that it is not something which exists in & of itself; this is to prevent the idea that—if there is some way of establishing it—then this nature should exist in truth.


[1430]
‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG GI YE SHES KYIS DON DAM BDEN PA GZHAL NA, BDEN GRUB TU ‘GYUR BAS DE SHES BYA MA YIN PA SLOB [f. 108a] DPON ‘DI’I LUGS SU SMRA BA NI,

Some people say that—if a realized being in a meditation on emptiness is able to bring ultimate reality under their consideration—then this reality would then have to exist truly; and that therefore it is not something which can ever be known.  They say that this is the position being taken by the master here.


[1431]
LUGS ‘DIS MNYAM GZHAG GIS RNYED KYANG BDEN PAR MA GRUB PAR BSHAD PA’I DON YE MA RTOGS BZHIN DU MKHAS PA’I LUGS NYAMS SU ‘JUG PA’O,,

People who describe it this way have failed, totally, to realize the point of the explanation that something can be discovered by this particular meditation and yet still not exist in truth; and in the midst of this failure, they are actually undermining the ways of the wise.


[1432]
DON DAM LAS GZHAN KUN RDZOB PA’I NGO BO NI, SO SO SKYE BO MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB KYI LING TOG GIS BLO’I MIG MA LUS PAR KHEBS PA RNAMS KYIS BRDZUN PA MTHONG BA’I STOBS LAS, BDAG GI NGO BO YOD PA RNYED PA YIN TE,

What then is the essential nature of that which is other than the ultimate—what is it for something to be deceptive?  Let’s look at common beings: people whose eyes—whose minds—are entirely wrapped within a coating of cataracts.  When they perceive something which is a lie, the power of this perception makes them “discover” that things have some essential nature of their very own.


[1433]
BYIS PA RNAMS KYI MTHONG BA’I YUL DU RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR SNANG BA DE BZHIN DU RANG GI NGO BO YOD PA NI MIN TE NGO BO GNYIS KYI GCIG YIN NO,,

And so this is another one of the two natures we’ve been talking about: as an object being perceived by those who are still infants, it appears to exist by definition; and yet at the very same moment, it is anything but something which could possess some essential nature of its own.


[1434]
DE LTAR DON DAM BDEN PA RNYED PA LA RNYED MKHAN ‘PHAGS PAR GSUNGS PA NI GTZO BO YIN PA LA DGONGS KYIS, SO SO SKYE BO DBU MA’I LTA BA RGYUD LDAN GYIS KYANG MI RNYED PAR BZHED PA MIN NO,,

And so where the scriptures say that “when someone discovers ultimate reality, the person doing the discovery is a realized being,” the statement is meant only to describe the main discoverer—therefore this statement is not expressing a position which says that ultimate reality is not discovered by a normal person who possesses an understanding of the view of the middle way.


[1435]
KUN RDZOB RNYED PA LA RNYED MKHAN SO SKYE RANG DGA’ BA LA GSUNGS PA YANG, KUN RDZOB PA’I MTSAN GZHI PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO RNAMS MA RIG PA’I GZHAN DBANG GIS MTHONG BA’I GTZO BO LA DGONGS KYI, ‘PHAGS PA’I RGYUD KYI THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS DNGOS PO DE RNAMS MI RNYED PAR BZHED PA MIN NO,,

As far as people who “discover” the deceptive, the discoverer here has been described in scripture as any average, normal person.  This statement though is meant to refer to primary act of observing typical examples of deceptive reality—inner & outer entities—under the thrall of misunderstanding.  It, in turn, is not expressing some position where we say that nominal types of accurate perception in the mind of a realized being never discover such entitites.


[1436]
KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA’I MTSAN GZHI BUM PA LA SOGS PA RNYED PA DBU MA’I LTA BA MA RNYED PA LA YANG YOD MOD KYANG, GZHI DE KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA YIN PAR TSAD MAS RNYED PA LA NI, SNGON DU DBU MA’I LTA BA RNYED PA CIG NGES PAR DGOS TE, 

It is admittedly the case that—with reference to discovering typical examples of deceptive reality, water pitchers & the like—the discovery can also be made by those who have yet to discover the viewpoint of the middle way.  Nonetheless, if we’re talking about discovering, with an accurate perception, that any particular object belongs to deceptive reality, a person must certainly have, previously, discovered the viewpoint of the middle way.


[1437]
GZHI DE KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR GRUB NA BRDZUN PAR ‘GRUB DGOS SHING, BRDZUN PAR DNGOS SU ‘GRUB PA LA GZHI DE [f. 108b] LA SNGON DU BDEN GRUB TSAD MAS KHEGS DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Establishing that any particular object belongs to deceptive reality requires that it be established as something which is a lie; and to establish, directly, that something is a lie requires having denied—earlier, and through the use of an accurate perception—that it exists in truth.


[1438]
DES NA BRDZUN PA MTHONG BA’I STOBS LAS ZHES PA NI, GANG ZAG RANG DGA’ BA DE RNAMS KYIS BRDZUN PA MTHONG YANG DE DAG GIS BRDZUN PAR ‘GRUB MI DGOS TE,

And so in the expression above about the power of perceiving that something is deceptive making something else happen, it’s not necessarily the case that—when some average person perceives something which is deceptive—they thereby establish that it is deceptive.


[1439]
DPER NA SGYU MA’I LTAD MO BAS SGYU MA’I RTA GLANG MTHONG BA NA BRDZUN PAR MTHONG YANG, SNANG BA DE BRDZUN PAR ‘GRUB MI DGOS PA BZHIN NO,,

A person watching a magic show, for example, can see an illusory horse or elephant, and are thus seeing something deceptive; but that doesn’t necessarily mean that they thereby establish that what appears to them is deceptive.


[1440]
DES NA KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR ‘JOG BYED BRDZUN PA MTHONG BAS RNYED PA’I DON NI, SHES BYA BRDZUN PA SLU BA’I DON ‘JAL BA’I THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS RNYED PA’O,,

As such, when we refer to a perception of deception which allows us to establish that a particular object belongs to deceptive reality, the meaning of the word “discover” here is that we have utilized a nominal form of accurate perception to bring under consideration the misleading nature of an entity which is deceptive.


[1441]
SNGAR BSHAD PA’I RANG BZHIN NAM NGO BO DE GNYIS LAS KYANG, YANG DAG PA’I DON MTHONG BA STE ‘JAL BA’I RIGS SHES KYIS RNYED PA’I YUL GANG YIN PA DE NI, DE NYID DE DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA STE, ‘DI NI RAB RIB ZHES SOGS KYI SKABS SU BSHAD PAR BYA’O,,

Earlier on, we made reference to two different kinds of nature, or essence; there is one of them which serves as the object which is discovered by the exploration of the nature of things which takes under its consideration—which sees—pure reality.  This is the one which is suchness, or ultimate reality.  We’ll be covering this point when we reach the lines of the root text which include the phrase, “due to some cataracts.”


[1442]
SHES BYA BRDZUN PA MTHONG BA THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS RNYED PA NI KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PAR STON PAS GSUNGS TE, DON DAM PA DANG KUN RDZOB RNYED PA’I GZHI GNYIS SO SOR GSUNGS KYI GCIG LA RNYED TSUL GNYIS BYUNG BA MIN NO,,

Existing entities which are seen to be a lie—which are discovered by a nominal form of accurate perception—are what the Teacher declared to be deceptive reality.  He described two separate bases or objects for discovering the ultimate & the deceptive; but it is not the case that there are two different ways of discovery for either one of the two realities individually.



Other presentations of the two realities

[1443]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from above: a description of other ways in which the two realities are set forth.


[1444]
BDEN PA GNYIS KYI DBYE GZHI LA ‘DOD TSUL MI ‘DRA BA MANG MOD KYANG, ‘DIR SHES BYA LA BYA STE YAB SRAS MJAL BA’I MDO BSLAB BTUS SU DRANGS PA LAS,

Now there are admittedly many positions we see taken with regard to what it is we are dividing when we divide out two realities.  Here though we are referring to all perceivable objects in the universe as the basis of this division.  As we read in The Sutra of the Meeting between the Father and his Son, as this is quoted in The Compendium—


[1445]
‘DI LTAR DE BZHIN GSHEGS PAS KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PA GNYIS THUGS SU CHUD DE, SHES PAR BYA BA YANG KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA ‘DIR ZAD DE, DE YANG BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS STONG PA NYID DU RAB [f. 109a] TU GZIGS RAB TU MKHYEN, LEGS PAR MNGON DU BYAS PAS DE’I PHYIR THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA ZHES BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS TE,

This is how the One Thus Gone knows these two—the deceptive & the ultimate—to be.  All the things in the universe which can be perceived are subsumed by two realities: the deceptive & the ultimate—and there are no other realities beyond these two.  And it is because the Conqueror sees, perfectly, emptiness; and because he knows it, perfectly; and because he has made it perfectly real, for himself, that he is called “The Omniscient One.”


[1446]
SHES PAR BYA BA YANG ZHES PAS SHES BYA DBYE GZHI DANG, ‘DIR ZAD DO ZHES PAS BDEN GNYIS SU GRANGS NGES PA DANG, BDEN PA GNYIS KA DE BZHIN GSHEGS PAS THUGS SU CHUD PA’I PHYIR THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAR BSTAN TO,,

When the selection says here “all the things in the universe which can be perceived,” this is a reference to the basis of the division here: what we are calling “all perceivable objects in the universe.”  Where it says “there are no other beyond these two,” the point is that there are precisely two types of reality: no less, and no more.  And the Buddha is informing us that someone is considered “omniscient” when they have grasped, perfectly, both of these truths.


[1447]
DES NA DON DAM BDEN PA SHES BYA MA YIN PA DANG, BLO GANG GIS KYANG MA RTOGS PA SPYOD ‘JUG GI DGONGS PAR ‘CHAD PA NI LOG PAR ‘CHAD PA’O,,

As such, it is a mistaken explanation when people say that the intention of A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life is to say that ultimate reality is not a perceivable object; or that this reality cannot be perceived by any state of mind at all.


[1448]
KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA DANG DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA GNYIS SU ‘BYED PA NI DBYE PA’I NGO BO’O,,

Given that perceivable things are what we are dividing, the very nature of the division then is into the two of deceptive reality, and ultimate reality.


[1449]
PHYE BA’I DON LA YANG MI ‘DRA BA DU MA ZHIG ‘DUG KYANG, ‘DIR NI GNYIS KA LA NGO BO YOD LA, DE LA NGO BO GCIG DANG THA DAD GANG YANG MIN PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR DANG,

The exact nature of the divisions can also be described in many different ways, but the point here is that both divisions have a particular nature.  And the nature of these natures is that they are either such that to be one is to be the other, or not—there is no other possible choice.


[1450]
CHOS CAN RNAMS BDEN STONG LAS NGO BO THA DAD NA BDEN GRUB TU ‘GYUR PA’I PHYIR, NGO BO GCIG LA LDOG PA THA DAD PA BYAS PA DANG MI RTAG PA LTA BU STE, BYANG CHUB SEMS ‘GREL LAS, 

Now if certain given objects were such that to be them were not to be empty of any true nature, they would perforce have to exist in reality.  As such, we would have to say that the two realities share the same nature, but in different manifestations—they are, for example, like being a thing which is made, and being a changing thing.  As A Commentary on the Wish for Enlightenment puts it,


	[1451]
,KUN RDZOB LAS NI THA DAD PAR,
,DE NYID DMIGS PA MA YIN TE,
,KUN RDZOB STONG PA NYID DU BSHAD,
,STONG NYID KHO NA KUN RDZOB YIN,
,MED NA MI ‘BYUNG NGES PA’I PHYIR,
,BYAS DANG MI RTAG DAG BZHIN NO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

There is no such thing
As suchness divorced
From the deceptive.

The deceptive is explained
As emptiness itself,
And only emptiness
Can be the deceptive.

Given the certainty
That one cannot occur
In the absence of the other,

They are like the qualities
Of being made, and of changing.


[1452]
RKANG PA DANG PO BZHI’I DON NI KUN RDZOB LAS NGO BO THA DAD PAR DE KHO NA NYID YOD PA MIN TE, KUN RDZOB PA RNAMS BDEN PAS STONG PA YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, BDEN STONG NYID KYANG GZHI KUN RDZOB LA ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’O,,

The point of the first two thirds of this quotation is that there exists no thusness which is divorced from the deceptive—for what deceptive things are, are those things which are devoid of being true; while at the same time the truth of emptiness is established relative to a certain basis, which happens to be those things which are deceptive.


[1453]
DE NAS GNYIS [f. 109b] KYIS NI DE LTAR YIN DANG MED NA MI ‘BYUNG BA’I ‘BREL PA NGES LA, DE YANG BDAG GCIG PA’I ‘BREL PA YIN PAS BYAS MI RTAG BZHIN DU NGO BO GCIG PAR BSTAN NO,,

The rest of the verse is to indicate that this is indeed the way things are, and that the relationship where one cannot occur without the other is absolutely certain; and since this is, further, a relationship where to be one is to be the other, then—like the qualities of being made, and of being a changing thing—they share a relationship of identity.


[1454]
PHYE BA SO SO’I NGOS ‘DZIN NI SNGAR TSAD MA GNYIS KYIS RNYED PA SO SO’I MTSAN NYID DU BSHAD PA BZHIN NO,,

The identification of the individual divisions is similar to where we said, before, that their individual definitions amount to those objects which are discovered by the two instances of an accurate perception.


[1455]
GAL TE ‘DI DANG SPYOD ‘JUG GNYIS MTHUN PAR ‘CHAD NA DE NYID LAS,
,KUN RDZOB DANG NI DON DAM STE,
,’DI NI BDEN PA GNYIS SU ‘DOD,
,DON DAM BLO YI SPYOD YUL MIN,
,BLO NI KUN RDZOB YIN PAR BRJOD,
CES GSUNGS PA ‘DI JI LTAR BSHAD PAR BYA ZHE NA,

One may counter with the following question:

You’ve mentioned that this explanation fits the one given in A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life; but how then do you explain the verse there which says—

The deceptive, and the ultimate;
These are the two kinds of reality
Which we accept.

The ultimate is not a place
Where the mind can ever go;
For the mind is described
As deceived.


[1456]
DE LA RKANG PA DANG PO GNYIS KYIS BDEN GNYIS KYI DBYE BA BSTAN LA, PHYE BA SO SO’I NGO BO NGOS ‘DZIN PA NA DON DAM BDEN PA’I NGOS ‘DZIN NI, DON DAM ZHES PA GCIG GIS DANG, KUN RDZOB BDEN PA’I NGOS ‘DZIN KUN RDZOB CES PA GCIG GIS STON NO,,

The first part of this verse is meant to present the division into two realities.  As for the identification of the two parts of the division, the one mention of “the ultimate” is meant to introduce ultimate reality; whereas the mention of “the deceptive” is to introduce deceptive reality.


[1457]
RKANG PA SNGA MAS DON DAM BDEN PA BLO’I YUL MIN PAR DAM BCAS PA RKANG PA PHYI MAS SGRUB PAR ‘DOD PA NI, GZHUNG DE DAG GI DON DU GTAN MI SNANG NGO,,

The belief that the first part of the verse presents an assertion that the ultimate could never be an object perceived by the mind; and that this assertion is somehow proven by the latter part of the verse, doesn’t in my opinion represent the point of these lines in any conceivable way at all.


[1458]
DES NA BDEN GNYIS KYI NGOS ‘DZIN ‘DI NI YAB SRAS MJAL BA BSLAB BTUS SU DRANGS PA LAS, DE LA KUN RDZOB NI ‘JIG RTEN GYI SPYOD PAR DE BZHIN GSHEGS PAS GZIGS SO, ,DON DAM PA GANG YIN PA DE NI BRJOD DU MED PA STE, SHES PAR BYA BA MA YIN, RNAM PAR SHES PAR BYA BA MA YIN PA, YONGS SU SHES PAR BYA BA MA YIN PA, MA BSTAN PA, ZHES SOGS GSUNGS PA’I DON SPYOD ‘JUG TU BKOD PA’O,,

Thus we can say that this identification of the two realities represents the point of citations such as the following—of The Meeting of the Father & the Son from The Compendium—inserted into the The Guide:

The One Thus Gone sees that deception represents the way of life of the world; whereas the ultimate is something beyond any description: it is not something you could ever know; no one could ever perceive it; none could grasp it, none could teach it.


[1459]
DE LA DON DAM BDEN PA SHES [f. 110a] PAR BYA BA MA YIN PAR BSHAD PA’I DON NI, ‘OG NAS BDEN PA GNYIS LA ‘JUG PA’I MDO DRANGS PA’I DON ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA LTAR DU BLO’I YUL DU MI ‘GYUR BA YIN NO,,


What does it mean here, when they say that ultimate reality is not something we could ever know?  The point is that—as we will see below, when we explain the import of a citation of the Sutra on Entering the Two Realities—it could never be the object of the mind.
	

[1460]
DE LTAR MI ‘JOG PAR BLO GANG GI YANG YUL MIN NA, RGYAL BAS KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PA STONG NYID KYI RNAM PA CAN THAMS CAD MNGON DU GYUR PAS THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAR ‘JOG PAR BSHAD PA DANG ‘GAL TE, ‘OG TU YANG MANG DU ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If it were not as we see it established there—and if ultimate reality then could never be the object of any state of mind at all—it would contradict the explanation that we establish the Victors as omniscient by virtue of the fact that, to them, both deceptive reality and all the forms of ultimate reality—the emptiness—that they display are objects perceived directly.


[1461]
KUN RDZOB BDEN PA’I NGOS ‘DZIN NI BLO RKYANG PA DER ‘JOG PA’I DON MIN GYI BLO’I YUL YIN LA, DE YANG ‘JIG RTEN GYI SPYOD PAR ZHES GSUNGS PAS, ‘JIG RTEN TE THA SNYAD PA’I SHES PA BRDZUN PA ‘JAL BA’I SPYOD PAR TE SPYOD YUL DU RNYED PA’I DON YIN PAS, BLO’I YUL KUN RDZOB PAR ‘DOD PA’I DON DE BZHIN DU BYA’O,,

As for the identification of deceptive reality, the point is not that we are talking about it being established to the one mind by itelf; rather, it is both the object of the mind and—given the mention of “the way of life of the world”—it is that thing which is discovered by the “worldly” state of mind, a reference to nominal perception: a state of mind which holds a lie under its consideration, as the object of its way of life.  As such, when we hold that an object of the mind is deceptive, this is how we should think of the point.


[1462]
SHES BYA LA BDEN PA GNYIS SU PHYE BA NI, SHES BYA LA DE GNYIS SU GRANGS NGES PAR STON PA YIN TE, ‘DI LA LUNG NI SNGAR DRANGS PA’I YAB SRAS MJAL BA DANG, ‘PHAGS PA DE KHO NA NYID NGES PAR BSTAN PA’I TING NGE ‘DZIN LAS KYANG,
,GANG ZHIG KUN RDZOB DE BZHIN DON DAM STE,
,BDEN PA GSUM PA GANG YANG MA MCHIS SO,
ZHES GSAL BAR GSUNGS SHING,

When we say that all perceivable things may be divided into two realities, what’s being indicated is that all things we can perceive are subsumed by these two realities—no more, and no less.  Scriptural support for this position is clearly expressed in the Sutra of the Meeting of the Father & the Son quoted above, and also in the Exalted Concentration which Reveals the Way of Suchness:

There is only the deceptive,
And just so the ultimate;

There is no third kind
Of reality at all.


[1463]
RANG ‘GREL LAS KYANG, DE BZHIN DU BDEN PA GZHAN GANG CUNG ZAD CIG YOD PA DE YANG CI RIGS PAR BDEN PA GNYIS KYI KHONGS SU GTOGS PA KHO NAR NGES PAR BYA’O,,

The autocommentary also states:

In the same way, it is an absolute certainty that the slightest bit of any other reality there may be can only be subsumed by these two realities, whichever it may be.


[1464]
ZHES SA BCU PA LAS BDEN PA’I MING CAN MANG DU GSUNGS PA THAMS CAD BDEN GNYIS SU [f. 110b] ‘DUS PAR GSUNGS SHING, DER BSHAD PA’I PHYE STE RTOGS PA’I BDEN PA NI PHUNG PO DANG KHAMS DANG SKYE MCHED KYI RNAM PAR BZHAG PA LA BSHAD PA’I PHYIR NA, SLOB DPON ‘DIS KYANG BDEN PA GNYIS SU GRANGS NGES PAR BZHED DO,,

What this is saying is that the many references to reality in The Ten Levels are all included into the two realities.  And since he explains the “reality that is grasped by making divisions” which is described in that teaching to be a presentation of the heaps, categories, and gateways, this master is also taking the position that the truths number two—never more, never less.


[1465]
RIGS PA NI GZHI GANG ZHIG BRDZUN PA SLU BA’I DON DU YONGS SU BCAD NA, MI SLU BA’I DE KHO NA NYID YIN PA RNAM PAR GCAD DGOS PAS, SLU MI SLU NI PHAN TSUN SPANGS TE GNAS PA’I DNGOS ‘GAL LO,,

When we say that something is “reasonable,” what we’re saying is that we have a certain object, and that we have eliminated the possibility that it is in any way false, or misleading.  And for it to be false, we would have to eliminate any possibility that it was the way things are: that it was not misleading.  As such, the two qualities of being misleading or not to be misleading stand in mutual contradiction—where when something is one, it cannot be the other.


[1466]
DE YIN NA NI SHES BYA THAMS CAD LA KHYAB PAR BYED PAS GNYIS DANG GNYIS MA YIN GYI PHUNG GSUM SEL BA YIN TE DBU MA SNANG BA LAS, PHAN TSUN SPANGS TE GNAS PA’I MTSAN NYID KYI CHOS DAG NI, CIG SHES {%SHOS} DGAG PA GZHAN SGRUB PA MED NA MED PA YIN PA’I PHYIR, GNYIS KA MA YIN PA’I PHYOGS SU RTOG PA YANG RIGS PA MA YIN NO, ZHES DANG,

And if something is this way, then it subsumes all the perceivable things there are; being either the two, or not the two, eliminates any third possibility between them.  As Light on the Middle Way puts it,

When two things are characterized by existing in a mutually exclusive relationship, then there exists no case where—if you eliminate the one—you do not establish the other.  As such, it would further be illogical to imagine that there existed an option where something were neither.
 

[1467]
GANG ZHIG YONGS SU GCOD PA GANG RNAM PAR BCAD PA MED NA MED PA DE GNYIS NI, PHAN TSUN SPANGS TE GNAS PA’I MTSAN NYID YIN NO, ,GANG DAG PHAN TSUN SPANGS TE GNAS PA’I MTSAN NYID YIN PA DE DAG NI, RNAM PA THAMS CAD LA KHYAB PAR BYED PA DAG YIN NO,,

And it says:

What characterizes a relationship of mutual exclusion is a relationship where it cannot be the case that if you eliminate one possibility you have not eliminated the other.  And two things which exhibit this mutually exclusive relationship also subsume all possibilities.


[1468]
GANG DAG RNAM PA THAMS CAD LA KHYAB PAR BYED PA YIN PA DE DAG NI, PHUNG PO GZHAN SEL BAR BYED PA DAG YIN TE, DPER NA LUS CAN DANG LUS CAN MA YIN PA LA SOGS PA’I BYE BRAG LTA BU’O,

Further, any two things which are such that they subsume all possibilities further eliminate any additional possibility.  An example would be the feature of being something which does possess a physical body, and the feature of being something which does not.


[1469]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR TE, ‘DI NI DNGOS ‘GAL GZHAN THAMS CAD LA YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Understand that these descriptions apply as well to every other instance of a relationship of mutual exclusion.


[1470]
PHUNG GSUM SEL BA’I DNGOS ‘GAL CIG [f. 111a] STON RGYU MED NA NI, YOD MED DAM GCIG DANG DU MA SOGS GANG ‘DOD CES MTHA’ GNYIS SU KHA TSON BCAD PA’I BRTAG PA BYAS NAS ‘GOG SA MED LA, YOD NA DNGOS ‘GAL GCIG ‘GOG PA NI CIG SHOS SGRUB PA MED NA MED PA YIN PAS, DBU MA THAL ‘GYUR BA LA DNGOS ‘GAL MED ZER BA NI, DGAG GZHAG GI RNAM GZHAG MA CHAGS PA’O,,

If we were unable to demonstrate this principle of mutual exclusion—where all third possibilities are eliminated—then we could never reach a place where we denied an idea by using an examination where we divided things into two opposing possibilities: existing or not existing; one or many; and so on.  And if we were able to show this exclusion, then there would be no possibility where if we denied one part of a direct of some mutual exclusion, we established its pair.  And if there were no such possibility, then the claim that those of the Consequence branch had no case of mutual exclusion here would represent a failure to follow the principles of denial or assertion.


[1471]
DNGOS ‘GAL GCIG RNAM PAR BCAD NA CIG SHOS YONGS SU GCOD PA DANG, GCIG ‘GOG NA CIG SHOS SGRUB DGOS PA LA DBU MA THAL RANG LA KHYAD PAR YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

If two things stand in direct contradiction to one another and eliminating one of the two possibilities eliminates the other; or if disproving one had to establish the other; then we would have to say that there was no distinction between the Consequence and Independent groups within the Middle Way school.



Deception within deception

[1472]
GSUM PA NI,

Next is the third part from above: an explanation of the divisions of deceptive reality, relative to the everyday world.

	[1473]
[VI.24]
Mṛṣā dṛśe’pi dvividhā matā hi
spaṣṭendriyā doṣavad indriyāś ca,
Sad indriya jñānam apekṣya mithyā
jñānaṃ mataṃ doṣa vad indriyāṇām.

,MTHONG BA BRDZUN PA’ANG RNAM PA GNYIS ‘DOD DE,
,DBANG PO GSAL DANG DBANG PO SKYON LDAN NO,
,SKYON LDAN DBANG CAN RNAMS KYI SHES PA NI,
,DBANG PO LEGS GYUR SHES LTOS LOG PAR ‘DOD,

We take the position
That those which see the lie
Are also of two types:

Where the powers are clear,
And where the powers
Are defective.

We take the position
That states of mind
Belonging to those
With powers
Possessing a defect,

Relative to states of mind
With powers which are sound,
Are mistaken.	


[1474]
KUN RDZOB LA YUL YUL CAN GNYIS LAS THOG MAR ‘JIG RTEN PA’I SHES PA LA LTOS NAS YUL CAN LA YANG DAG PA DANG LOG PA GNYIS SU STON PA NI,

When the deceptive is described in terms of objects & subjects, what’s presented first among these two is the perceptions of the world—that is, relative to these perceptions, the subject state of mind is said to come in two forms: the correct, and the mistaken.


[1475]
SHES BYA LA BDEN PA GNYIS SU PHYE BAR MA ZAD BRDZUN PA MTHONG BA’I YUL CAN LA’ANG, YANG DAG PA DANG LOG PA GNYIS SU ‘DOD DE,

The point here is that—not only are all perceivable objects divided into two realities—but we take the position that the subject states of mind, those which see the lie, are also divided into two types: those which are correct, and those which are mistaken.


[1476]
DBANG PO GSAL BA STE ‘PHRAL GYI ‘KHRUL RGYUS MA BSLAD PA’I DBANG PO DANG, DE LA BRTEN PA’I SHES PA DANG, DBANG PO SKYON LDAN TE ‘PHRAL GYI ‘KHRUL RGYUS BSLAD PA’I YUL CAN GNYIS SO,,

These two consist of subject states of mind where the powers are “clear”—referring to powers which are not infected by any adventitious condition which would cause them to be mistaken, along with states of mind founded upon such powers; and then subject states of mind where the powers are defective: those which are infected by just such an adventitious condition.


[1477]
DE LA SKYON DANG LDAN PA’I DBANG PO CAN RNAMS KYI BSLAD PA’I SHES PA NI, DBANG PO LEGS PAR GYUR PA STE ‘PHRAL GYI ‘KHRUL RGYUS MA BSLAD PA’I SHES PA LA LTOS NAS, LOG PA’I SHES PAR ‘DOD CING, SNGA MA NI YUL PHYIN CI MA LOG PA ‘DZIN PAR ‘DOD DO,,

Let’s consider states of mind belonging to those with powers possessing a defect—that is, consider their state of mind, which is infected.  Relative to powers which are sound—that is, relative to states of mind which are not infected by some adventitious condition which would cause them to be mistaken, we take the position that these other states of mind are mistaken.  Our position further states that the former—the unaffected states of mind—are to be considered unmistaken.


[1478]
KHYAD PAR DE GNYIS KYANG DBU MA’I LUGS MIN GYI ‘JIG RTEN PA’I SHES PA [f. 111b] LA LTOS NAS YIN NO,,

These two distinctions are, moreover, made relative to a state of mind in the normal, everyday world; it is not some kind of distinction that depends upon the teachings of the middle way.


	[1479]
[VI.25]
Vinopaghātena yad indriyāṇāṃ
ṣaṇṇām api grāhyam avaiti lokaḥ,
Satyaṃ hi tal lokata eva śeṣaṃ
vikalpitaṃ lokata eva mithyā.

,GNOD PA MED PA’I DBANG PO DRUG RNAMS KYIS,
,GZUNG BA GANG ZHIG ‘JIG RTEN GYIS RTOGS TE,
,’JIG RTEN NYID LAS BDEN YIN LHAG MA NI,
,’JIG RTEN NYID LAS LOG PAR RNAM PAR BZHAG,

		Things which are held
		By the six senses where they

		Are not adversely affected
		Are those perceived
		By the everyday world;
 
		Relative to the world itself,
		These are real—the rest
		Are established as mistaken,
		Even just to the world [f. 205b].


[1480]
YUL CAN LA PHYIN CI LOG MA LOG GNYIS SU PHYE BA DE BZHIN DU, YUL YANG YIN PAR STON PA NI, ‘PHRAL GYI ‘KHRUL RGYU’I GNOD PA MED PAR DBANG PO DRUG GI SHES PA RNAMS KYIS GZUNG BAR BYA BA’I DON GANG ZHIG ‘JIG RTEN GYIS RTOGS PA DE NI,

The next lines are meant to show that—just as subject states of mind may be divided into the two of unmistaken, and mistaken—so too may objects.  Let’s consider those objects which are perceived by the world: entities which are held by awarenesses of the six senses where these are not adversely affected by any adventitious condition which would cause them to be mistaken.


[1481]
‘JIG RTEN NYID DE KHO NA LAS BDEN PA STE YANG DAG PA YIN GYI, ‘PHAGS PA LA BLTOS NAS YUL DE DAG BDEN PA DANG YANG DAG PAR ‘JOG PA NI MA YIN NO,,

Only relative to the world itself would these states of mind be real—that is, correct.  Relative to realized beings, however, such objects could not be considered true, correct.


[1482]
‘PHAGS PA ZHES PA DANG DBU MA’I LUGS ZHES PA NI ‘DIR DON ‘DRA’O,,

When we refer to “realized beings” here, we mean it in the same sense as “the system of the middle way.”


[1483]
LHAG MA STE GZUGS BRNYAN LA SOGS PA GANG ZHIG DBANG PO RNAMS LA GNOD PA YOD PA NA YUL DU SNANG BA DE NI, ‘JIG RTEN NYID LA BLTOS NAS LOG PAR RNAM PAR BZHAG GO

“The rest”—a reference to cases where certain objects appear to the senses and there is some potential problem going on, such as in the case of a reflection in a mirror—are established as being mistaken, even just relative to the everyday world.


[1484]
,NYID KYI SGRAS NI SHES PA DE RNAMS ‘KHRUL PAR ‘JOG PA LA NI, THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MA NYID KYIS CHOG GI RIGS SHES LA MI LTOS PAR STON PA’O,,

The expression “even just” here is meant to indicate that it’s enough here—when we establish these states of mind as mistaken—to utilize even just a nominal form of accurate perception; it’s not that, rather, we would have to rely upon some exploration of the way things are.


[1485]
DE LA DBANG PO LA GNOD PA’I RKYEN NANG NA YOD PA NI RAB RIB DANG MIG SER LA SOGS PA DANG DA DU RA ZOS PA LA SOGS PA’O,,

Items that could be included among things that represent potential problems to the senses are cataracts or the effects of jaundice, or such; or else, for example, consuming datura.


[1486]
DA DU RA NI THANG PHROM STE, DE’I ‘BRAS BU ZOS NA THAMS CAD GSER DU SNANG BA’O, ,SOGS PAS NI RIMS LA SOGS PA BSDU’O,,

When we say “datura” here, we’re referring to the plant that we call tang-trom in Tibetan; when you eat it, everything you look at takes on a yellowish cast.  And when we say “or such,” we mean to include other ailments, such as plague.


[1487]
DBANG PO LA GNOD PA’I RKYEN PHYI NA YOD PA NI, ME LONG DANG BRAG PHUG LA SOGS PA NAS SGRA BRJOD PA DANG, SOS KA’I NYI MA’I ‘OD ZER BYE MA SKYE {%SKYA} BO’I YUL DANG NYE BAR GYUR PA LA SOGS PA STE, DE DAG NI DBANG PO LA GNOD PA’I RKYEN NANG NA MED KYANG, RIM PA BZHIN DU GZUGS BRNYAN DANG BRAG CHA DANG SMIG RGYU LA CHU [f. 112a] LA SOGS PAR ‘DZIN PA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR RO,,

There are also external conditions which can adversely affect the powers; examples would be a mirror; or calling into a cave; or situations such as approaching an object which is reflected in white sand under the rays of the summer sun.  Even though these are not conditions which would adversely affect the powers and which are also within us, nonetheless they can act as causes for us to perceive, respectively, a reflection; an echo; or a mirage that we take as water—and so on.


[1488]
DE BZHIN DU MIG ‘PHRUL MKHAN LA SOGS PAS SBYAR BA’I SNGAGS DANG SMAN LA SOGS PA YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

We can understand, in the same way, the spells and potions and such composed by an illusionist or the like.


[1489]
YID KYI DBANG PO’I GNOD PA NI SNGAGS DANG SMAN LA SOGS PA DE DAG DANG GRUB MTHA’ LOG PA DANG, GTAN TSIGS LTAR SNANG DANG GNYID KYI GNOD PA SOGS SO,,

Conditions which can adversely affect the power of the thought would be things like the spells, potions, and such just mentioned—as well as mistaken schools of thought; false logic; or the mental hindrance caused by sleep.


[1490]
GNYID NI DBANG PO DRUG GI NANG NAS YID KYI GNOD PAR GSUNGS PAS, RMI LAM DU DBANG SHES YOD PAR SLOB DPON ‘DI BZHED CES PA NI LOG PAR BSHAD PA CHEN PO’O,,

It is a huge misexplanation to claim that, since he clarifies the adverse affect of sleep here as referring to—from among “the six senses”—that of the mind, this master takes the position that we do possess sense powers during a dream.


[1491]
DE LTAR NA THOG MA MED PA NAS ZHUGS PA’I BDAG TU ‘DZIN PA GNYIS KYI MA RIG PA LA SOGS PAS BSLAD PA’I GNOD PA NI ‘DIR GNOD PA’I RGYUR MI GZUNG GI, SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI ‘PHRAL GYI DBANG PO LA GNOD PA’I ‘KHRUL RGYU RNAMS GZUNG NGO,,

As such, we are not in this particular section identifying “adverse effects” in the sense of those brought about by conditions such as misunderstanding in the form of the two ways in which we believe that objects are themselves—something which has gone on within us for time with no beginning.  Rather, as we put it earlier, we are identifying here the adventitious or short-term conditions which adversely affect the senses, and cause them to make errors.


[1492]
DE LTA BU’I GNOD PA MED PA’I SHES PA DRUG GIS GZUNG PA’I KUN RDZOB PA’I DON DANG, DE LAS BZLOG PA’I DON LA YANG DAG DANG LOG PAR ‘JOG PA NI ‘JIG RTEN PA’I SHES PA KHO NA LA LTOS NAS YIN TE, DE DAG JI LTAR SNANG BA LTAR GYI DON DU YOD PA LA ‘JIG RTEN PA’I SHES PAS GNOD PA MED PA DANG YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

When we speak of the deceptive objects which are perceived by six forms of consciousness which are not adversely affected; and when we posit the opposite types of objects, dividing them into correct and mistaken; we do so relative only to states of mind of the everyday world.  And that’s because we are deciding whether or not these objects exist in the way they appear depending upon whether states of mind belonging to the everyday world can draw them into question or not.


[1493]
‘PHAGS PA LA LTOS NAS NI YANG LOG GNYIS SU MED DE, JI LTAR GZUGS BRNYAN LA SOGS SNANG BA LTAR GYI DON DU MED PA BZHIN DU, MA RIG PA DANG LDAN PA RNAMS LA SNGON PO LA SOGS PA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR SNANG BA YANG, SNANG BA LTAR GYI DON DU MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

There is no such division in this case of correct & mistaken perceptions when the reference is, rather, to how a realized being sees things.  Objects such as those reflected in a mirror, for example, do not exist in reality as they do in appearance; just so, it is the case that objects such as blue appear, to those who still possess misunderstanding, as though they existed by definition—but these things do not in fact exist the way they appear.


[1494]
DE’I PHYIR [f. 112b] SHES PA DE GNYIS LA ‘KHRUL MA ‘KHRUL YANG DBYER MED DO,,

Neither do we, therefore, make a division of these two states of mind into mistaken & unmistaken.


[1495]
‘O NA DBANG PO GZUGS CAN LA ‘PHRAL GYI GNOD PA YOD PAS YUL LOG PAR SNANG BA DANG, YID KYI SHES PA LA GNYID LA SOGS PA’I GNOD PA YOD PAS, RMI LAM DU MIR SNANG BA SOGS LA MI LA SOGS PAR ‘DZIN PA DANG, SAD DUS SU SGYU MA’I RTA GLANG GI SNANG BA LA RTA GLANG DANG SMIG RGYU CHUR SNANG BA LA CHUR ‘DZIN PA RNAMS

One may then raise the following issue—

Well then.  Let’s take a case where an object appears in a mistaken way to physical sense powers which do involve some kind of adventitious condition that would adversely affect them; or where the awareness of the thoughts is adversely affected by sleep, or anything of the like; or where, in the waking state, we take the appearance of an illusory horse or elephant to be a horse or elephant—or the appearance of water in the case of a mirage to be water.


[1496]
PHYIN CI LOG YIN PAR, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I BLO RANG DGA’ BAS KYANG RTOGS MOD KYANG, YID LA GRUB MTHA’ NGAN PA’I GNOD PA YOD PAS LOG PAR BZUNG BA’I DON RNAMS, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I BLO RANG DGA’ BAS PHYIN CI LOG TU MI RTOGS PAS, ‘JIG RTEN NYID LAS LOG PAR JI LTAR BZHAG CE NA,

We can admittedly come to realize, even just with some random state of mind from the everyday world, that things like these are mistaken.  In the case though where we take particular objects in the wrong way because our mind is adversely affected by mistaken schools of thought, it is not that we can realize—with just such a random state of mind from the everyday world—that such objects are mistaken.  How then can we say of these particular objects that, even just from the viewpoint of the everyday world, they are mistaken?


[1497]
‘DIR GNOD PA YOD MED DPYOD PA’I GNOD PA NI, LHAN SKYES KYIS PHYIN CI LOG TU ‘DZIN PA’I GNOD PA LA MI BYED PAS, GRUB MTHA’ NGAN PAS BTAGS PA NI GRUB MTHAS BLO BSGYUR BA KHO NAS LOG PAR BTAGS PA’I GTZO BO SOGS YIN LA,

The answer is that—when we are looking into the question of whether or not there is some adverse effect going on—we are not referring to an adverse effect in the sense of an inborn state of mind holding to an object in a mistaken way.  When we speak of an object which is imputed by the ideas of a mistaken school, we are speaking for example primarily of an object imputed only by the thoughts of those who have been influenced by some school of thought.


[1498]
DE DAG PHYIN CI LOG TU ‘JIG RTEN PA’I BLO RANG DGA’ BAS MI RTOGS KYANG, DE KHO NA NYID LA MNGON DU MA PHYOGS PA’I THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS LOG PAR RTOGS NA, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I SHES PAS LOG PAR RTOGS PA YIN NO,,

It is not the case that just some random state of mind from the everyday world can come to a realization that such objects are mistaken; nonetheless, we can say that when we employ a nominal form of accurate perception which is not approaching the idea of suchness to realize that a particular object is mistaken, this object has been realized to be mistaken, by a state of mind which belongs to the everyday world.


[1499]
BDAG ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES GNYIS KYIS BZUNG BA’I DON LTA BU NI, GNOD PA MED PA’I DBANG POS BZUNG BA ZHES PA YIN LA, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I BSAM PA RANG DGA’ BA LA BLTOS NAS YANG DAG PA’AM BDEN PA YIN MOD KYANG THA SNYAD DU YANG MED DO,,

When though we take the example of something like an object which is perceived by the two versions of the innate form of the tendency to believe that things are themselves, we say that “it is perceived by powers which are free of being affected adversely.”  And in this case the object is admittedly “correct”—or real—relative to random thoughts of the everyday world; although in fact it does not exist at all, even in a nominal sense.


[1500]
GAL TE YANG DAG [f. 113a] PA’I KUN RDZOB MI ‘DOD PAS YANG LOG GNYIS SU MI BYED KYANG, MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA’I YUL DANG YUL CAN RNAMS LOG PA’I KUN RDZOB TU CI’I PHYIR MI ‘JOG CE NA,

One may then raise another question:

Suppose we refuse the idea of a deceptive object which is “correct”; and thus refuse the division of such objects into correct & incorrect.  Why though can’t we say that objects & subjects involved in the infection of the mind by misunderstanding may be established as a mistaken form of deceptive reality?


[1501]
KUN RDZOB NI THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS ‘JOG DGOS PA’I PHYIR LOG PA’I KUN RDZOB ‘JOG NA YANG DE LA BLTOS NAS ‘JOG DGOS NA, MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD PA NI ‘KHRUL PAR THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS MI ‘GRUB PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Deceptive reality is something which must be established by a nominal form of accurate perception; as such, if we were to establish a mistaken form of deceptive reality, that too would have to be established relative to this type of perception.  It is not the case then that we could ever use a nominal form of accurate perception to determine that something infected by deep seeds of misunderstanding was mistaken.



Views inspired by sleep

[1502]
BZHI PA NI, DA NI BSHAD ZIN PA’I YID KYI GNOD PAS ZHEN YUL LA ‘KHRUL BA SPYIR BSTAN PA’I DON DE NYID, MTSAN GZHI BYE BRAG LA DPER BRJOD PA’I TSUL GYIS BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

This brings us then to our fourth point from above: demonstrating that—when we are mistaken towards the object we think we see—this object that we believe in does not even exist nominally.  And so now we will take this same general topic that we’ve discussed—the way in which, as we’ve already described, we make an error about what we think we see, due to some problem in our mind—and give an explanation where we apply to particular classic cases, in a metaphor.


	[1503]
	[VI.26]
Ajñāna nidrā pracalāya mānais
tīrthair yathāsvaṃ parikalpitā ye,
Māyā marīcyādiṣu kalpitāś ca
teṣām atattvaṃ khalu lokato’pi.

,MI SHES GNYID KYIS RAB BSKYOD MU STEGS CAN,
,RNAMS KYIS BDAG NYID JI BZHIN BRTAGS PA DANG,
,SGYU MA SMIG RGYU SOGS LA BRTAGS PA GANG,
,DE DAG ‘JIG RTEN LAS KYANG YOD MIN NYID,

The nature of the self—
As it is imagined
By those of lower views,

Inspired by the sleep
Of misunderstanding;

And those things imputed
In illusions, mirages, & the like,

Are nothing that
Could ever exist,
Even relative to the world.


[1504]
MI SHES PA’I GNYID KYIS YID RAB TU BSKYOD PA’I MU STEGS CAN YID LA PHYIN CI LOG GI GRUB MTHA’ NGAN PA DANG, GTAN TSIGS LTAR SNANG GI GNOD PA YOD PA ‘DI DAG NI, DE KHO NA NYID LA ‘JUG PAR ‘DOD PAS SKYE BO MA BYANG BA GNAG RDZI DANG BUD MED LA SOGS PA YAN CHAD LA GRAGS PA’I SKYE BA DANG, ‘JIG PA LA SOGS PA PHYIN CI MA LOG PA MA BZUNG BAR, ‘JIG RTEN PA RNAMS LAS PHUL DU BYUNG BAR ‘GRO BAR ‘DOD PAS,

Consider now those of lower views, whose minds are inspired by the sleep of misunderstanding—those with minds adversely affected by mistaken, undesirable schools of thought, or false forms of logic.  They wish to rise above the everyday world: they hope to engage in the way things really are.  But they want to do so without recognizing things like starting & stopping—in the way these are understood among those who have not applied themselves formally to philosophy, beginning for example from cowherds or women—as being unmistaken.


[1505]
DPER NA SHING LA ‘DZEG PAS YAL GA PHYI MA MA BZUNG BAR SNGA MA BTANG BAR LTAR, LTUNG BA CHEN POS LTA BA NGAN PA’I RI SUL DU LTUNG BAR ‘GYUR ZHING, BDEN GNYIS LEGS PAR MTHONG BA DANG BRAL BAS ‘BRAS BU THAR PA THOB PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

These people are like those who are climbing a tree and let go of the lower branch before they have clasped the higher—and thus suffer a great fall, where they drop into the ravine of undesirable viewpoints, and fail to see the two realities clearly.  As such, they are unable to attain the goal, of freedom.


[1506]
DE’I PHYIR MU STEGS CAN ‘DI RNAMS KYIS RANG RANG GI GZHUNG LAS ‘BYUNG BA’I BDAG NYID JI LTA BA BZHIN [f. 113b] DU YON TAN GSUM LA SOGS PA GANG BRTAGS PA NI, ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB TU YANG YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

This too is why the nature of the self—as it is imagined by these followers of lower views in their holy books, as having three qualities and so forth—is not something which exists even in the deceptive reality of the everyday world.


[1507]
‘DIS NI LUGS ‘DIS BLO ‘KHRUL PA CIG GI NGOR YOD PA LA, KUN RDZOB TU YOD PAR ‘JOG ZER BA LEGS PAR BKAG GO

This in itself is enough to disprove, perfectly, the claim by this system that a thing is established as existing deceptively relative to the perceptions of a mistaken state of mind.


[1508]
,DE BZHIN DU SGYU MA DANG SMIG RGYU DANG GZUGS BRNYAN LA SOGS PA LA RTA GLANG DANG, CHU DANG BYAD BZHIN SOGS SU BRTAGS PA GANG YIN PA DE DAG KYANG, ‘JIG RTEN KUN RDZOB LAS KYANG YOD PA MIN PA NYID DO,,

In the same way, those things that are imputed to be horses & elephants; or water; or the object placed before a mirror and so forth—illusions, mirages, reflections & the like—are nothing that could ever exist, even relative to the world: to deceptive reality.


[1509]
DE LTAR NA THA SNYAD DU YOD PA LA NI TSAD MAS GRUB PA ZHIG DGOS SO,,

As such, for a thing to exist nominally, it must be something which is confirmed by an accurate perception.


[1510]
DE ‘DRA BA’I ZHEN YUL RNAMS THA SNYAD DU YANG MED KYANG SNANG YUL LA NI DE LTAR MI BZHED DO,,

When we say that things like this which we think are there don’t even exist in a nominal way, we are not saying that this is what we accept with regard to the object as it appears to us.


[1511]
DA LTA GZUGS SGRA SOGS LNGA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR DBANG SHES LA SNANG BA NI, MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA YIN PAS SHES PA DE DANG, GZUGS BRNYAN DANG BRAG CHA SOGS SNANG BA’I DBANG SHES RNAMS LA, PHRA RAGS TZAM MA GTOGS PA SNANG YUL LA ‘KHRUL MA ‘KHRUL LA KHYAD PAR MED CING, SNGO SOGS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA DANG, GZUGS BRNYAN BYAD BZHIN DU YOD PA MI SRID KYANG,

Right now the five types of objects which include visible & audible forms are assuming an aspect—within our sense consciousnesses—where it seems as though they existed by definition.  This is something that is happening because these states of mind are infected by misunderstanding.  As such, when we compare these mental states to forms of sense consciousness which are assuming the aspect of things like a reflection in a mirror, or an echo, there is no difference between them where one is mistaken and the other is not—only some distinction of relative subtlety.  It is impossible for things like the color blue to exist by definition; and it is impossible for reflections to be the things standing before the mirror.


[1512]
BYAD BZHIN DU MED PA’I GZUGS BRNYAN YOD PA BZHIN DU, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MIN KYANG SNGO SOGS YOD DGOS LA, DE YANG PHYI ROL GYI DON DU YOD PA BZHIN DU GZUGS BRNYAN YANG GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED DU BZHED PA YIN TE, ‘OG NAS GZUGS BRNYAN GYIS DE SNANG BA’I DBANG SHES SKYED PAR YANG GSUNGS SO,,

And yet there can still exist a reflection in the mirror which does not exist as the object placed before the mirror; just so, blue & the like—despite the fact that they do not exist by definition—must still exist.  Moreover, we take the position that the reflection, just as it exists as an outer object, belongs to the door of sense composed of visible objects.  That is, it will be stated—further on—that the reflection acts to produce a sense consciousness which assumes its aspect.


[1513]
TSUL DE DAG NI MIG LA RTA GLANG DU SNANG BA’I SGYU MA DANG BRAG CHA SOGS [f. 114a] LA YANG SHES PAR BYA STE, LUGS DAM PA ‘DI YI RNAM GZHAG THUN MONG MA YIN PA’O,,

You should understand that these descriptions apply as well to cases such as where an illusion appears to the eye as though it were a horse or elephant; or where there is an echo.  This is a unique presentation of this highest of all systems of thought.



The blind do not disprove the seeing

[1514]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to the second part in our general presentation of the two realities: how we apply this presentation to the present topic.


	[1515]
[VI.27]
Na bādhate jñānam ataimirāṇāṃ
yathopalabdhis timirekṣaṇāṇām,
Tathāmala jñāna tiraskṛtānāṃ
dhiyāsti bādho na dhiyo’malāyāḥ.

,MIG NI RAB RIB CAN GYIS DMIGS PA YIS,
,RAB RIB MED SHES LA GNOD MIN JI LTAR,
,DE BZHIN DRI MED YE SHES SPANGS PA’I BLOS,
,DRI MED BLO LA GNOD PA YOD MA YIN,

The perceptions of eyes
Clouded with cataracts

Cannot draw into question
A state of mind
Without such cataracts;

And there is nothing about
A mind which has abandoned
The wisdom free of stain

Which could ever draw
Into question the state of mind
Which is free of stain—

These two cases then
Are the same.


[1516]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON THA SNYAD PA’I SHES PAS MI ‘JOG PA DE’I PHYIR, GZHAN SKYE ‘GOG PA NI ‘JIG RTEN PA’I LTA BA KHO NA LA GNAS NAS MI BYED KYI, ‘PHAGS PA’I DE KHO NA NYID KYI GZIGS PA KHAS BLANGS NAS DON DAM PAR ‘GOG PA YIN NO,,

There is a specific object—that is, suchness—which cannot ever be established by a nominal state of mind.  As such, the denial that things could grow from something other than themselves is not something which can be accomplished if we remain just in the viewpoints of the everyday world.  Only after we have accepted the vision of suchness attained by a realized being can we deny that this growth could ever exist in an ultimate way.


[1517]
GANG GI TSE GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA ‘DI LA DON DAM GYI KHYAD PAR SBYOR BA YIN PA DE’I TSE, JI LTAR MIG NI RAB RIB CAN GYI SHES PAS SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA DMIGS PAS, RAB RIB KYIS MA BSLAD PA’I SHES PA LA SKRA SHAD SOGS MI SNANG BA LA GNOD PA MIN PA

Suppose that as we deny that things could grow from things other than themselves, we apply the distinction that we are referring here to growing in an ultimate sense.  Think then of how a state of mind influenced by eyes clouded with cataracts perceives a strand of hair, or something similar.  This state of mind cannot draw into question the way in which no strand of hair or the like ever makes its appearance to a state of mind which is not infected by such cataracts.


[1518]
JI LTA BA DE BZHIN DU, DRI MA STE ZAG PA MED PA’I YE SHES SPANGS PA STE DE DANG BRAL BA’I SO SKYE’I BLO MA RIG PAS BSLAD PAS, MA RIG PAS MA BSLAD PA’I DRI MA STE ZAG PA MED PA’I BLO LA GNOD PA YOD PA MA YIN PAS,

Consider secondly the mind of a normal person: a mind which has abandoned—which still lacks—that wisdom which is free of stain, or impurity; that is to say, a state of mind which is infected by misunderstanding.  There is nothing about this mental state which could ever draw into question the state of mind which is free of the stains—the impurities—brought about by the infection caused by misunderstanding.  These two cases then are exactly the same.


[1519]
DON DAM PAR GZHAN SKYE BKAG PA LA ‘JIG RTEN PA’I NGOR GZHAN SKYE GRUB TU CHUG KYANG MI GNOD DO,,

As such, when we undertake to deny that things could grow—in an ultimate sense—from things other than themselves, it would not draw our position into question even if we allowed that the growth of things from things other than themselves were confirmed in the eyes of the everyday world.


[1520]
DE’I PHYIR PHA ROL PO NI DAM PA MKHAS PA DAG GIS BZHAD GAD DU BYA BAR ‘OS SO,,

Given all this, it would not be inappropriate for “the holy”—for sages—to consider the other party at this point to be a laughing stock.



Seeing deceptive reality is real

[1521]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA BSHAD PA DANG, DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA BSHAD PA’O,,

This brings us to our third point from before: a separate explanation of the nature of each of the two realities.  This consists of two parts of its own—an explanation of deceptive reality; and an explanation of ultimate reality.


[1522]
DANG PO LA GSUM, KUN RDZOB PA GANG GI NGOR BDEN LA GANG GI NGOR MI BDEN PA DANG, KUN RDZOB TZAM DE GANG ZAG GSUM LA SNANG BA DANG MI SNANG BA’I TSUL DANG, SO SKYE DANG ‘PHAGS PA LA LTOS TE DON DAM PA DANG KUN RDZOB TU ‘GYUR TSUL LO,,

We’ll cover the first of these in three steps:

 An examination of the state of mind to which deceptive reality
	is real, and the state of mind to which it is not real;
 An examination of which of the three types of individuals
basic deception can appear to, or not appear; and
 A description of the way in which things can become either
	ultimate or deceptive, relative to a common being, or
	a realized being.


[1523]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, NYON MONGS KYI RNAM [f. 114b] GZHAG THUN MONG MA YIN PA BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these will have two parts of its own: a description of the actual point, followed by an explanation of this unique presentation on the negative emotions.


	[1524]
[VI.28]
Mohaḥ svabhāvāvaraṇād dhi saṃvṛtiḥ
satyaṃ tayā khyāti yad eva kṛtrimam,
Jagāda tat saṃvṛti satyam ityasau
Muniḥ padārthaṃ kṛtakañ ca saṃvṛtiḥ.

,GTI MUG RANG BZHIN SGRIB PHYIR KUN RDZOB STE,
,DES GANG BCOS MA BDEN PAR SNANG DE NI,
,KUN RDZOB BDEN ZHES THUB PA DES GSUNGS TE,
,BCOS MAR GYUR PA’I DNGOS NI KUN RDZOB TU’O,,

Dark ignorance draws a veil
Over the nature of things,
And from that fact is deception.

		Due to this, things
		That are a false construct
		Appear as though
		They were real.

		These were described
		By the Able One to be
		A deceptive reality:

		Objects which make up
		This false construct
		To the deceptive.


[1525]
‘DIS SEMS CAN RNAMS DNGOS PO JI LTAR GNAS PA’I RANG BZHIN LTA BA LA SGRIB PA STE RMONGS PAR BYED PA’I PHYIR NA GTI MUG STE, MA RIG PA DNGOS PO’I NGO BO RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MA YIN PA LA, RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PAR BYED PA YIN LUGS KYI RANG BZHIN MTHONG BA LA SGRIB PA’I BDAG NYID CAN NI KUN RDZOB BO,,

Dark ignorance is given its name from the fact that it leaves living beings in the dark: it draws a veil over our ability to see how things really exist—their nature.   Misunderstanding enables us to see things as more than they actually are: it makes us believe that the essential nature of things—which is anything but these things’ existing through some nature of their own—is for them to exist through just such a nature.  “Deception” then is that entity whose nature is to veil our ability to see the true nature of things: the way they truly are.


[1526]
‘DI NI KUN RDZOB BDEN PA ZHES PA’I BDEN PA, KUN RDZOB PA GANG GI NGOR ‘JOG PA’I KUN RDZOB NGOS ‘DZIN PA YIN GYI, KUN RDZOB PA SPYI NGOS ‘DZIN PA MIN NO,,

The “reality” in the expression “deceptive reality” is meant to identify deception in terms of the particular party deceived.  We are not here identifying deception in general.


[1527]
NGOS ‘DZIN DE YANG LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS,
,DNGOS RNAMS SKYE BA KUN RDZOB TU,
,DAM PA’I DON DU RANG BZHIN MED,
,RANG BZHIN MED LA ‘KHRUL PA GANG,
,DE NI YANG DAG KUN RDZOB ‘DOD,

As for this approach in identifying the deceptive, A Journey to Langka says—

Everything in the world
Starts in a way which is deceptive;

Things have no nature
Of starting in a way
Which is ultimate.

When we make a mistake
About the lack of a nature to things,

We say we’ve been deceived
About what is actually there.


[1528]
CES DON DAM PAR RANG BZHIN MED PA LA RANG BZHIN YOD PAR ‘KHRUL BA’I BLO KUN RDZOB PA YIN PAR GSUNGS PA’I DON NO,,

What’s being said here is that “deception” is a reference to that state of mind which makes this mistake of thinking that things which ultimately have no nature do have one.


[1529]
KUN RDZOB DE NI KUN RDZOB KYI SKAD ‘DOD SGRIB BYED LA YANG ‘JUG PAS SGRIB BYED DO,,

The Sanskrit word here for “deception,” sanvirti, can also be translated as that which veils; as such, we can describe the deception here as “that which veils.”


[1530]
DES GANG LA SGRIB NA YANG DAG KUN RDZOB ‘DOD CES PAS YANG DAG PA’I DON LA SGRIB PAS KUN RDZOB BAM SGRIB BYED DU ‘DOD CES PA STE, YANG LOG GNYIS KYI NANG NAS YANG DAG KUN RDZOB TU STON PA MIN NO,,

What is it that this reality veils?  Given the wording “deceived about what is actually there,” what we’re referring to is deception—a veil—in the sense of what covers & conceals actual reality.  This is not meant to be a reference to a “correct” form of deceptive reality, in the division of that reality into correct & mistaken.


[1531]
RKANG PA DANG POS BSTAN PA’I KUN RDZOB DANG, RKANG PA PHYI MA GNYIS KYIS BSTAN PA’I KUN RDZOB GNYIS GCIG TU MI BYA STE, DANG PO NI, RANG GIS DNGOS PO RNAMS SKYE BA SOGS SU GANG DU KHAS LEN PA’I KUN RDZOB YIN LA, PHYI MA NI DNGOS PO RNAMS GANG GI NGOR BDEN PA’I BDEN ‘DZIN GYI [f. 115a] KUN RDZOB YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We are not to take the mention of “deception” in the first half of the verse in the same way that we take the “deceive” in the second half.  The first refers to a kind of deceptive reality involved for example in the growing of things—this is something that we would accept.  The second refers to how things deceive us when they seem to be real, to our tendency to hold things as real.


[1532]
KUN RDZOB BDEN ‘DZIN DE’I MTHUS SNGON PO LA SOGS PA GANG ZHIG ,RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED BZHIN DU DER SNANG BAR BCOS PA’I BCOS MA SEMS CAN RNAMS LA BDEN PAR SNANG BA DE NI,

Due to the power of this deception, in the form of our tendency to believe that things are real, there comes a construct where things like the color blue appear to exist through some nature of their own—in the very moment that they cannot.  This false construct is something which appears, to living beings, as though it were real.


[1533]
SNGAR BSHAD PA’I ‘JIG RTEN GYI PHYIN CI LOG GI KUN RDZOB PA DE’I NGOR BDEN PAS ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA ZHES THUB PA DES GSUNGS TE, GSUNGS TSUL NI SNGAR GYI MDO DER GSUNGS PA’O,,

As such, the construct was spoken by the Able One to be a “deceptive reality for the everyday world”—since to deception in the form of this mistaken state of mind of the everday world, as we’ve described that up to here, it is taken to be real.  How the Buddha said this is as we see it spoken in the sutra citation given above.


[1534]
GANG ZAG GSUM PO GANG GI NGOR MI BDEN PA’I RTOG PAS BCOS PAS BCOS MAR GYUR PA’I DNGOS PO NI DE’I KUN RDZOB PA’I NGOR MI BDEN PAS KUN RDZOB TZAM ZHES BYA’O,,

Let’s consider the objects which make up this false construct—this construct of our imagination, which is a construct that, to the perceptions of three particular types of individuals, is unreal.  Since these objects are, to their deceptive perceptions, unreal, they can be called “basic deception.”


[1535]
RTEN ‘BYUNG GZUGS BRNYAN DANG BRAG CHA SOGS CUNG ZAD CIG NI BRDZUN YANG MA RIG PA DANG LDAN PA RNAMS LA SNANG LA, SNGON PO LA SOGS PA’I GZUGS DANG SEMS DANG TSOR BA SOGS CUNG ZAD CIG NI BDEN PAR SNANG STE, CHOS RNAMS KYI YIN LUGS KYI RANG BZHIN NI MA RIG PA DANG LDAN PA RNAMS LA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MI SNANG NGO, ,DE’I PHYIR RANG BZHIN DE DANG GANG ZHIG KUN RDZOB TU YANG BRDZUN PA NI KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA MA YIN NO,

A bit of the things that occur in dependence—that is, things like reflections in mirrors, or echoes—are lies; but they do make their appearance to those possessed of misunderstanding.  So too a little bit of physical forms like the color blue; and things like the mind and our feelings, appear really.  But the nature of things, in the sense of the way things actually are, cannot in any manner make its appearance to those who still have misunderstanding.  As such, a nature to things—and forms of the deception which are themselves a lie—do not constitute deceptive reality.


[1536]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON BSHAD NA CUNG ZAD CIG CES PA NI, NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS ‘GA’ ZHIG TU BSGYUR BA LTAR BDE’O,,

In explaining the point of this statement, it would be more comfortable if we utilized Natktso’s translation, switching the “little bit” to “some number of.”


[1537]
GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS BRDZUN YANG SNANG BA NI BRDZUN PAR SNANG BA YIN LA, DE NI BYAD BZHIN DU SNANG BA DANG DES STONG PA GNYIS TSOGS PA’I BRDZUN PA YIN PAS, DE’I BDEN STONG NI BYAD BZHIN DU BDEN PAS STONG PA YIN GYI, GZUGS [f. 115b] BRNYAN RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I BDEN STONG GI DON MED DO,,

Reflections & the like can lie to us; but still they do make their appearance, in a lying way.  This is a kind of lie where there is a combination of two things: something appearing to be the object which was placed in front of the mirror; and this something’s being void of actually existing as that object.  As such, when we speak of “voidness of reality” here what we are talking about is the fact that the reflection is void of any existing, in reality, as the object reflected.  We are not referring here to a voidness of reality in the sense of the reflection being empty of any true existence, in the form of existing by definition.


[1538]
DE’I PHYIR GZUGS BRNYAN BYAD BZHIN GYIS STONG PAR GRUB KYANG, GZUGS BRNYAN RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I KUN RDZOB KYI NGOR BDEN PA YIN PA LA ‘GAL BA CI YANG MED PA’I DNGOS PO YIN PAS KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA YIN NO,,

As such, we can establish that the reflection is devoid of being the object placed before the mirror; but this is a case of a thing where there is absolutely no contradiction for this object to exist as real in the perceptions of a deception which holds that the reflection exists by definition.  As such, this thing then is, as well, a case of deceptive reality.


[1539]
DES NA GZUGS BRNYAN KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA MIN PAR GSUNGS PA NI, BRDA LA BYANG BA’I ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB KYI NGOR BYAD BZHIN GYI GZUGS BRNYAN LTA BU DE, BYAD BZHIN YIN PA DE BRDZUN PAS

Let’s look then at the statement that a reflection in the mirror is not deceptive reality.  What this is meant to refer to is something like the idea of a reflection of an object standing before a mirror—to the deceptive perceptions of the everyday world, a world where people are already familiar with the meaning of the particular words being used—actually being this object: that would be a lie.


[1540]
DE LA LTOS PA’I KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA MIN PA LA DGONGS KYI, MTHONG BA BRDZUN PA’I KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR GSUNGS, ZHES PAS BSHAD PA’I KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR MI ‘JOG PA GA LA YIN,

Relative to this situation, it’s being said, the reflection is not a case of deceptive reality.  “It was declared” though “that the one seen to be a lie is deceptive reality”—given these words, how could you ever say the reflection couldn’t be described as belonging to deceptive reality?


[1541]
DE LTA MA YIN PAR KUN RDZOB TU BDEN PAR MED NA KUN RDZOB BDEN PA YIN PAR ‘GAL NA, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA THA SNYAD DU YANG MED PAR GSUNGS PA DANG, BDEN GRUB ‘GEGS PA DANG BDEN MED SGRUB PA THAMS CAD THA SNYAD DU BYED PA’I RNAM GZHAG THAMS CAD DANG ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If it were not this way, and if there were nothing at all that constituted reality in a deceptive form, then it would be a contradiction for the reflection to be an instance of deceptive reality.  And if that were the case, it would contradict the entire structure of things existing in name: everything about statements that things which existed by definition could never exist even nominally; the denial of things existing in truth; and the proof that nothing exists in truth.


[1542]
DE’I PHYIR GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS ‘JIG RTEN PA’I SHES PA RANG DGA’ BAS KYANG ‘PHRUL {%’KHRUL} PAR SHES PA’I YUL RNAMS KUN RDZOB BDEN PA MIN GYI KUN RDZOB TZAM MO, ZHES ZER BA NI BDEN GNYIS KYI GRANGS NGES DANG, ‘JIG RTEN PA LA LTOS PA’I BDEN BRDZUN DANG, DBU MA PAS ‘JOG PA’I BDEN BRDZUN LA GO BA MA CHAGS PA’I GTAM DU SNANG NGO,,

Given all this, let’s look at the claim that “Objects like a reflection in a mirror, which are understood to be mistaken even by some random state of mind in the everyday world, do not constitute deceptive reality; rather, they are just basic deception.”  It would appear that such statements are the chatter of people who have failed to form an understanding of how the types of reality are fixed at two, no more and no less; and of the concepts of truth & falsity relative to the beliefs of the everyday world; and of these same two concepts as they are set forth by those who follow the middle way.


[1543]
RANG BZHIN NI MA RIG PA DANG LDAN PA LA THAMS CAD DU MI SNANG NGO ZHES GSUNGS [f. 116a] PA YANG, MA RIG PA MA SPANGS PA’I ‘PHAGS PAS DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PAR BZHED PAS NA, MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA’I SHES PA LA DGONGS LA,

Consider as well the statement that “A nature to things is not something that makes its appearance, in every aspect, to those who still possess misunderstanding.”  Given the fact that we accept the idea that a realized being who has yet to rid themselves of misunderstanding can realize thusness directly, such statements are intended to refer to a state of mind which is infected by misunderstanding.


[1544]
‘PHAGS PA SLOB PA’I RJES THOB KYI YE SHES DANG, SO SKYE’I DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA RNAMS, MA RIG PA DANG DE’I BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD PA YIN PAS MNGON SUM DU MI SNANG YANG, SPYIR DON DAM BDEN PA SNANG BAR ‘DOD DGOS SO,,

The wisdom of a realized being who is still learning, during the “aftermath” period subsequent to the direct perception of emptiness; as well as correct views about suchness possessed by common beings; are still infected by misunderstanding, and by the deep seeds for this misunderstanding.  As such, they may not take on an aspect of ultimate reality directly; but still we would take the position that—in general—they do take on this aspect.


[1545]
DE LTAR NA RE ZHIG SRID PA’I YAN LAG GIS BSDUS PAS NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PA’I DBANG GIS, KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA RNAM PAR GZHAG GO ZHES GSUNGS PAS NI, CHOS RNAMS BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA’I MA RIG PA GANG ZAG DANG CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN DU GRAGS PA NI, YAN LAG BCU GNYIS KYI MA RIG PAR BZHED PAS SHES SGRIB TU MI BZHED DO,,

There is a statement that, “In a preliminary assessment, then, we posit a deceptive form of reality due to the type of misunderstanding which involves negative emotions and which is counted among the links of the cycle of pain.”  Given these words, the form of misunderstanding which holds things to be real—what we commonly know as the tendency to hold that the person & things are themselves—is accepted as being the form of misunderstanding included into the twelve links of dependence.  And as such, it would not be accepted as being an obstacle to omniscience.


[1546]
MA RIG PA BDEN ‘DZIN DE’I DBANG GIS KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA ‘JOG CES PA NI, BDEN PA KUN RDZOB PA GANG GI NGOR ‘JOG PA’I ‘JOG TSUL STON PA YIN GYI, KUN RDZOB BDEN PA YIN PA’I BUM SNAM SOGS BDEN ‘DZIN DES ‘JOG CES PA MIN TE, BDEN ‘DZIN DES BZHAG PA NI RANG GIS THA SNYAD DU YANG MI SRID PAR BZHED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What does it mean when we say that “We posit a deceptive form of reality due to this type of misunderstanding—this particular tendency to hold things as being real”?  What this sentence is indicating is the way in which we posit realities depending on whether the object involved exists in the perceptions of a true or a deceptive state of mind.  The point being made is not that particular examples of deceptive reality such as a water pitcher or a bolt of cloth are established by this tendency to see things as real.  This is because we take the position that any object whose existence was established by this tendency to perceive things as real would be an impossibility, even in a nominal sense.


[1547]
DES NA KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA ZHES PA’I ZUR GYI BDEN PA GANG GI NGOR ‘JOG PA’I KUN RDZOB DANG, BUM SOGS KUN RDZOB TU YOD PAR ‘JOG PA’I KUN RDZOB RNAMS MING MTSUNGS PAS, DON YANG GCIG TU ‘KHRUL BA MANG DU BYUNG SNANG BAS LEGS PAR PHYED PAR BYA’O,,

Given all this, let’s look at this word “reality,” as a component in the expression “deceptive reality.”  “Deception” in the sense of the state of mind in whose perceptions the deceptive is established; and “deception” in the sense of the state of mind which helps us establish that things like water pitchers exist in a deceptive manner, are exactly the same names.  It appears that, because of this, there have been many mistakes made where people took the meaning of the two to be the same as well.  Work hard then to make a proper distinction between these two.


[1548]
‘O NA BUM SOGS ‘DI RNAMS SANGS MA RGYAS PA’I GANG ZAG THAMS CAD KYI [f. 116b] KUN RDZOB KYI NGOR BDEN PA YIN NAM, GANG ZAG ‘GA’ ZHIG GI KUN RDZOB KYI NGOR MI BDEN PA YANG YOD CE NA,

One may then ask the following question:

Well then.  Is it the case that all these things—water pitchers & the like—are real in the perceptions of all beings who have yet to become enlightened?  Or can they not be real, in the deceptive perceptions of certain individuals?


[1549]
KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PAR ‘JOG PA’I GZUGS SGRA SOGS DE YANG, NYAN RANG DANG BYANG SEMS NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PA SPANGS PA, ‘DU BYED GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS DANG ‘DRA BAR GZIGS PA RNAMS LA NI, BCOS MA’I RANG BZHIN YIN GYI BDEN PA NI MA YIN TE, BDEN PAR MNGON PAR RLOM PA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,

Let’s consider objects such as visible or audible form, as these are established to be part of deceptive reality.  Their nature is further one of a false construct, and not of truth, in the high perceptions of those listeners, self-made buddhas, and bodhisattvas who have rid themselves of misunderstanding which is involved with negative emotions; as well as in the perceptions of those who have seen that all factors are similar to a reflection in a mirror, or the like.  To people such as these, these things have a nature of being a false construct, but not of being true—for these individuals are free of any mistaken fantasy that the things could be real.


[1550]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON BSHAD NA, GANG GI NGOR MI BDEN PA’I GANG ZAG NI GSUM STE, NYAN RANG DANG BYANG SEMS SO,,

Let’s explain what this statement is talking about.  First of all, the reference is to three different individuals in whose perceptions these things are not real.  These are the listener, the self-made buddha, and the bodhisattva.


[1551]
DE YANG NYAN RANG DANG BYANG SEMS GANG YIN LA MI BYED PAS KHYAD PAR SMOS PA NI, ‘DUS BYAS THAMS CAD GZUGS BRNYAN BZHIN DU RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG YANG DER SNANG BAR MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA NI KHYAD PAR GCIG GO

This is further not a reference to just any listener, self-made buddha, or bodhisattva—and here’s the difference.  One distinction is based on the fact that all things brought about by causes & conditions are like a reflection in a mirror, devoid of any nature of their own; and yet they do appear to have such a nature—and these are people who have realized this in a direct manner.


[1552]
,DE TZAM NI BYANG SEMS SA BDUN PA BA MAN CHAD DANG, NYAN RANG ‘PHAGS PA SLOB PA RNAMS LA’ANG YOD PAS DE GCAD PA’I PHYIR DU, GANG ZAG GSUM PA LA MA RIG PA SPANGS PA ZHES GSUNGS PAS DAG PA SA’I BYANG SEMS DANG, NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM PA GNYIS LA BYA STE DE GSUM GYI NGOR MI BDEN PA’O,,

This distinction in itself also applies to bodhisattvas on the seventh bodhisattva level on down, and to listeners & self-made buddhas who are realized beings but not yet enlightened.  In order to clarify that these people are not whom we’re talking about, we add the qualifier for these three individuals that—as stated—they have “rid themselves of misunderstanding.”  As such, the wording here is actually meant to refer to bodisattvas who have reached one of the levels of purity; and to listeners & self-made buddhas who are already enemy destroyers.  It is to the perceptions of these three that these things are unreal.


[1553]
GANG ZHIG MI BDEN PA NI DE YANG ZHES PA PHYI NANG GI CHOS RNAMS SO,,

And what are “these things” that are unreal?  Remember the reference to “further” above, meaning that we are referring to all outer & inner phenomena.


[1554]
MI BDEN PA’I RGYU MTSAN NI BDEN PAR RLOM PA STE BDEN ZHEN MED PA’I PHYIR TE, BDEN ‘DZIN GYI MA RIG PA ZAD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And what is the reason that these things are “unreal” at this point?  It’s because these individuals no longer possess any belief in things as real: they are free of any mistaken fantasy that things could be real.  Which is to say, they have put an end to misunderstanding in the form of believing that things are real.


[1555]
DES NA PHYI NANG GI CHOS RNAMS GANG ZAG GSUM PO DE’I KUN RDZOB KYI NGOR BDEN PAR MA GRUB PAR SGRUB PA YIN NO,,

Thus it is then that we establish that—to the perceptions of the deceptive state of mind of these three individuals—outer & inner phenomena cannot be determined to be real.


[1556]
DE LTAR ‘GREL PAS DE RNAMS KYI NGOR KUN RDZOB BDEN PA MIN PAR YE MA BSGRUBS PAR BDEN PA [f. 117a] MIN ZHES BSGRUBS PA LA, KUN RDZOB BDEN PA MIN PAR BSGRUBS PAR ‘DZIN PA NI, HA CANG YANG BLO’I ‘JUG PA RTZINGS PAS SLOB DPON GYI DGONGS PA RANG GI BLO’I DRI MAS SBAGS NAS ‘CHAD PA’I LUGS NGAN PA’O,,

Let’s look then at the conclusion drawn in the autocommentary that these things are not real, in not being established in any way—to their perceptions—as not being deceptive reality.  Taking this to be an assertion that what they see is not deceptive reality represents a total insensitivity to the actual meaning; it is a distasteful system of explanation where people have polluted the true intent of this master with the stench of their own way of thinking.


[1557]
DE LTAR SGRUB PA YANG GANG ZAG DE GSUM LA MIN GYI, DE GSUM GYI NGOR BDEN PA MIN PA GANG ZAG GZHAN BDAG CAG RNAMS LTA BU LA SGRUB PA YIN NO,,

How we establish things as we said is not that we refer to these three individuals themselves, but rather to something not being real to the perceptions of the three.  It is determining the case for other persons—such as you & me.


[1558]
GANG ZAG DE GSUM MIN PA’I ‘OG MA RNAMS LA NI LHAN SKYES KYI BDEN ‘DZIN YOD PAS, DE RNAMS KYI KUN RDZOB GANG YIN THAMS CAD KYI NGOR GANG YANG BDEN PAR MA GRUB PAR SGRUB MI NUS SO,,

People other than these three types—those at lower levels—still possess the inborn form of the tendency to believe that things are real.  We would never be able to establish that the things that are deceptive for them lacked any true existence, to anyone’s perceptions at all.


[1559]
SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTA MIN PAR DE DAG GI NGOR KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA MIN PA BSGRUB NA NI, SHIN TU MA ‘BREL BA’I SGRUB BYED DU ‘GYUR TE, BLO DE’I NGOR GZHI DE KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR ‘GRUB PA LA GZHI DE BRDZUN PAR ‘GRUB DGOS PAS DE LA BDEN ZHEN MED PA RGYU MTSAN DU ‘GOD PA NI BZHAD GAD KYI GNAS SO,,

Suppose it were not the way we’ve explained it up to here: suppose to their perceptions things that were not deceptive reality could be established.  The assertion then would lose any pertinence to anything at all.  That is, in order to establish—to such a state of mind—that any particular object belonged to deceptive reality, we would have to prove that the object was lying to us.  As such, positing—as our reason here—the idea that such individuals have no belief in reality deserves no more than our laughter.


[1560]
BLO DE’I NGOR GZHI DE KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR ‘GRUB PA LA GZHI DE BRDZUN PAR ‘GRUB DGOS PA’I RGYU MTSAN NI, BUM SOGS LA KUN RDZOB BDEN PA ZHES PA’I TSIG ZUR GYI BDEN PA ‘JOG PA NA BLO DANG DON GNYIS LAS, DON LA BDEN PAR MI ‘JOG PAR, BDEN ‘DZIN KUN RDZOB PA’I NGO BO NYID DU BDEN PAR GZHAG DGOS PAR MTHONG BA NA, KHYAD PAR DE MA SBYAR NA BDEN PAR MI ‘GRUB CING BRDZUN PA YIN PAR MTHONG DGOS PA’I GNAD KYIS YIN NO,,

Now what is the reason that—in order to establish that a certain object is, to this particular state of mind, deceptive reality—we would have to establish that the object was lying to us?  Consider how we establish the word “reality,” in the expression “deceptive reality,” in the case of something like a water pitcher.  Does it refer to the state of mind, or to the object of this mind?  We are not in fact establishing the object as reality; rather, we need to establish reality here in the sense of establishing that the tendency to believe that things are real itself constitutes the essence of the deception.  Once we see the need to do so, we can perceive that—without applying this distinction—the object does not exist in reality, and is lying to us.  The need is the key here.



A unique presentation
on the negative emotions

[1561]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: an explanation of this unique presentation on the negative emotions.


[1562]
LUGS ‘DI LA NYON MONGS KYI NGOS ‘DZIN MNGON PA GONG ‘OG [f. 117b] NAS BSHAD PA DANG MI MTHUN PA THUN MONG MA YIN PA CIG YOD PA DE SHES PA GAL CHE BAR SNANG BAS DE BSHAD NA,

The present system has a way of identifying the negative emotions which is unique—that is to say, it is not shared with the explanation of these emotions found in the higher & lower divisions of the system called Higher Knowledge.  It seems to me that a knowledge of this presentation is quite important, and so I will cover it here.


[1563]
DNGOS PO BDEN ‘DZIN LA GANG ZAG DANG CHOS LA BDEN ‘DZIN GNYIS YOD LA, DE NYID BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS SU’ANG BZHED PA NI SNGAR BSHAD ZIN TO,,

There are two versions of the tendency to believe that things are real: these are the pair of holding that the person is real, and then holding that things are real.  This is, as we’ve explained above, what we mean when we say that we assert that there are two ways of holding that things are themselves.


[1564]
BDEN ‘DZIN DE ‘JUG ‘GREL DANG, BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA GNYIS KAR NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PAR BSHAD LA, MA RIG PA DE NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM GYIS SPANGS PA DANG, BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PAR MI SKYE BA’I CHOS LA BZOD PA THOB PA’I BYANG SEMS KYIS SPANGS PAR BSHAD DO,,

The tendency to believe that things are real is explained—in both the autocommentary to Entering the Middle Way and in the commentary to the 400 Verses—to be misunderstanding which is involved with negative emotions.  Listener and self-made buddha types of enemy destroyers have rid themselves of that form of misunderstanding; and the commentary to the 400 Verses explains that a bodhisattva who has attained the state called “mastery over unborn things” has as well rid themselves of this misunderstanding.


[1565]
DE’I PHYIR NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PA NI, BDAG MED PA’I DE KHO NA NYID RIG PA’I MI MTHUN PHYOGS DANG, DE YANG RIG PA DE MED PA TZAM DANG, DE LAS GZHAN PA TZAM LA MI BYED KYI, ‘GAL ZLA MI MTHUN PHYOGS GANG ZAG DANG CHOS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PA’O,,

As such, the form of misunderstanding which is involved with negative emotions represents the opposite of understanding where we grasp suchness, in the form of things not being themselves.  This “misunderstanding” refers not to a simple lack of understanding, nor even something other than understanding—but constitutes a direct and contradictory opposite to understanding.  Which is to say, this state of mind sees things where they are not: it believes that the person, and things, exist through some nature of their own.


[1566]
DE LTAR BYAS NA CHOS KYI BDAG TU SGRO ‘DOGS PA NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PAR ‘JOG PA DANG, NGA DANG NGA YI BA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA GNYIS ‘JIG LTAR ‘JOG PA RNAMS MNGON PA BA DANG MI MTHUN NO,,

As such, we can here establish “misunderstanding involved with negative emotions” as being the tendency to see a self-nature to entities which they don’t in fact possess.  And then we can establish, as being the view of destruction, the two tendencies to see “me” and “mine” as existing by definition.  This way of doing it is not shared with the presentation of the Higher Knowledge schools.


[1567]
MNGON PA BA’I LUGS KYIS NI MDZOD ‘GREL GYI GNAS DGU PA LAS BSHAD PA LTAR, GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS SU YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA ‘JIG LTA NGAR ‘DZIN DANG, BDAG GI BA RNAMS GANG ZAG RDZAS YOD DE’I DBANG BSGYUR BYAR ‘DZIN PA NI, ‘JIG LTA BDAG GIR ‘DZIN PAR ‘JOG PA YIN TE CHES MI MTHUN [f. 118a] NO,,

And how do these Higher Knowledge schools make their presentation?  We can refer to the explanation that we see in the ninth chapter of the autocommentary to the Treasure House.  Here, first we establish the tendency to hold to some “me” as the view of destruction in the form of holding that the person is substantial, in the sense of being self-standing.  And then there is the view of destruction in the form of holding to some “mine”—which is established as the belief that the things belonging to this “me” are things which are under the control of a person who is themselves substantial.  As such, the two presentations are not at all shared.


[1568]
GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS YOD DU ‘DZIN PA NI GRUB MTHAS BLO MA BSGYUR BA LA YANG YOD MOD KYANG, GANG ZAG PHUNG PO DANG MTSAN NYID MI MTHUN PA’I GZHAN DU YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA NI GRUB MTHAS BLO MA BSGYUR BA LA MED DO,,

Now we would admit that the tendency to hold the person as being substantial, in the sense of being self-standing, can also be possessed by a person whose mind has not been influenced by the teachings of some particular school of thought.  It is not the case though that someone whose mind has not been influenced in this way would ever hold that the person is other than the parts to the person, in the sense of being an entity with characteristics inconsistent with those of these parts.


[1569]
DE LTAR NA MTHAR ‘DZIN PAR LTA BA YANG GNYIS SO,,

Given all this, we can say that there are also two versions to the viewpoint which holds to philosophical extremes.


[1570]
GAL TE GANG ZAG DANG CHOS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA YOD PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYOGS LA, DE LTAR ‘DZIN PA DE RNAMS NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PA DANG, BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS SU JI LTAR SGRUB CE NA,

One may ask the following question:

Let’s look at systems of thought which accept the idea that there do exist a person, and things, which exist by definition.  How do people who hold such views establish misunderstanding which is involved with negative emotions, and the two ways of holding that things are themselves?


[1571]
GANG ZAG DANG CHOS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NI, DE ‘GOG PA’I RIGS PA RNAMS KYIS KHEGS PAR ‘GYUR ZHING, DE’I TSE DE LTAR ‘DZIN PA DE ZHEN YUL LA ‘KHRUL PA’I BDEN ‘DZIN DU ‘GRUB LA, DE GRUB NA GANG ZAG DANG CHOS GNYIS BDEN GRUB TU ‘DZIN PA BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS SU ‘GRUB BO,,

They refute the idea that the person & things could exist through some nature of their own by employing different forms of reasoning which disproves it.  They would establish, at this point, the tendency to hold these things this way as being a tendency to hold that things are real where we are mistaken about the object that we think we see.  Once this is established, they establish that the tendencies to hold the person and things as being real are what constitute the two forms of holding that things are themselves.


[1572]
DE RNAMS GRUB NA BDEN ‘DZIN DE DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON RIG PA’I ‘GAL BA MI MTHUN PHYOGS SU ‘GRUB PAS, MA RIG PAR ‘GRUB CING, DE MA ZAD PAR {%BAR} DU ‘JIG LTA YANG MI ‘DZAD PAR SGRUB NUS PAS, NYON MONGS CAN GYI MA RIG PAR ‘GRUB PAS NYON MONGS KYI RNAM GZHAG THUN MONG MA YIN PA ‘JOG SHES PA SHIN TU GAL CHE’O,,

Once these things are established, they can establish that the tendency to see things as real constitutes the direct, contradictory opposite of understanding suchness.  With this, they have established what constitutes misunderstanding.  Since we can prove that—until we finish this off—we could never finish off the view of destruction either, then once we have established what misunderstanding involved with negative emotions is, we can posit a unique presentation on the negative emotions.  Understanding all this is extremely important.


[1573]
‘DOD CHAGS LA SOGS PA NYON MONGS GZHAN RNAMS KYANG BDEN ‘DZIN GYI GTI MUG LAS ‘JUG TSUL NI, BZHI BRGYA PA LAS,
,LUS LA LUS DBANG JI BZHIN DU,
,GTI MUG KUN LA GNAS ‘GYUR TE,

How do we describe the way in which desire & the rest—the other negative emotions—engage in their objects by way of that dark ignorance where we still hold that things are real?  As the 400 Verses puts it,

Dark ignorance abides
In all of them,

Just as the powers of the body
Reside throughout it.


[1574]
ZHES PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, GTI MUG NI DE RNAMS JI LTAR BDEN PAR RTOGS PA [f. 118b] LAS RMONGS PA NYID KYI PHYIR, DNGOS PO BDEN PA’I RANG GI NGO BOR LHAG PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PAR RAB TU ‘JUG GO

The commentary to the 400 explains this as follows.  

Dark ignorance is completely ignorant of how to understand these things as they really are.  As such, it delves into objects seeing in them more than is there: believing that they they possess some essential nature of being real.


[1575]
,’DOD CHAGS LA SOGS PA DAG KYANG GTI MUG GIS KUN TU BRTAGS PA’I DNGOS PO’I RANG BZHIN KHO NA LA, SDUG PA DANG MI SDUG PA LA SOGS PA’I KHYAD PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PAR ‘JUG PA

And then emotions such as desire as well engage, exclusively, in a nature to things which has been imputed to them by this dark ignorance, ascribing features such as being beautiful or being ugly—giving these details more reality than they have.


[1576]
NYID KYI PHYIR, GTI MUG LAS THA MI DAD PAR ‘JUG PAR ‘GYUR ZHING, GTI MUG LA BRTEN PAR YANG ‘GYUR TE, GTI MUG GTZO BO NYID KYI PHYIR RO,

And for this very reason, none of these emotions engages in their objects divorced from dark ignorance—they all rely upon this ignorance.  For dark ignorance, surely, is the lord of them all. 


[1577]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR BSHAD NA, ‘JUG GO ZHES PA YAN GYIS GTI MUG BDEN ‘DZIN DU STON NO,,

Using this citation as the basis of our explanation, we can say that the first of the three sections here is meant to indicate that what “dark ignorance” refers to is our tendency to believe that things are real.


[1578]
CHAGS SOGS RNAMS GTI MUG LAS THA MI DAD PAR ‘JUG PA NI, GTI MUG DANG MTSUNGS LDAN DU ‘JUG GI DE DANG BRAL BAR MI ‘JUG PA’O,,

When it says that none of the emotions such as attachment engages in its object divorced from dark ignorance, what it means is that they engage in their objects even as they share a mental link with this kind of ignorance; that is, they do not engage in their objects without it.


[1579]
DE’I RGYU MTSAN NI CHAGS SOGS NAS ‘JUG PA NYID KYI PHYIR ZHES PA YIN NO,,

And the reason why we can say this is expressed in the words, “for this very reason,”—because of the simple fact that attachment & the rest are engaging in the objects.


[1580]
DE LA YUL LA YID DU ‘ONG MI ‘ONG GI KHYAD PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PA NI CHAGS SDANG GNYIS SKYE BA’I RGYU TSUL MIN YID BYED YIN PAS, CHAGS SDANG GNYIS KYI ‘DZIN STANGS STON PA MIN NO,,

Now what does it mean when we say that these emotions are “ascribing features such as being attractive or being unattractive to their objects, giving these things more reality than they have”?  Given that attending to objects in an incorrect manner is the cause for both attachment & repulsion to grow, these words are not meant to describe the way in which the pair of attachment & repulsion hold their object to be.  


[1581]
DES NA GTI MUG GIS KUN BRTAGS PA KHO NA LA ZHES SOGS NI, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHO NA’I YID DU ‘ONG MI ‘ONG SGRO BTAGS PA LA BRTEN NAS CHAGS SDANG GNYIS ‘JUG PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’O,,

And thus the words “engage, exclusively, in a nature to things which has been imputed to them by this dark ignorance.”  What this is saying is that attachment & repulsion can only engage in objects that are attractive or unattractive in a way which makes them more real than they are: these objects are exclusively those that would be existing through some nature of their own.


[1582]
GTI MUG GIS BTAGS PA’I BDEN GRUB KHO NA CHAGS SOGS KYI DMIGS RNAM GNYIS KYI NANG NAS DMIGS PAR STON PA MIN TE, BDAG ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES GNYIS KA’I DMIGS RNAM GNYIS KYI DMIGS PA GZHI GRUB PA YIN LA, CHAGS SOGS KYANG GTI [f. 119a] MUG DANG MTSUNGS LDAN YIN PAS DMIGS PA MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This is not to say though that it is only the real existence imputed by dark ignorance which can serve as one of the things belonging to the two sets of objects perceived by attachment or the like.  For objects in the form of the two aspects of objects perceived by both the inborn forms of the tendency to believe that things are themselves are in fact existing entitites.  And since the attachment or whatever shares a mental link with the dark ignorance, the objects of the two are also shared.


[1583]
TSUL MIN YID BYED DE GNYIS KYIS DRANGS PA’I YUL LA ‘DOD PA’I RNAM PA CAN DANG, MI ‘DOD PA RGYAB KYIS PHYOGS PA’I RNAM PA CAN NI, CHAGS PA DANG SDANG BAR ‘GYUR BAS,

And so there are two kinds of “attending to objects in an incorrect manner” here; and the objects they elicit take on an aspect of being desirable, or being the opposite: undesirable.  This then is what leads to the attachment or the repulsion.


[1584]
GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS YOD DU ‘DZIN PAS DRANGS PA’I ‘DOD MI ‘DOD KYI RNAM PA CAN TZAM ZHIG ,’DOD CHAGS DANG ZHE SDANG DU ‘JOG PA MIN PA’I PHYIR, CHAGS SDANG GNYIS KYANG ‘JOG TSUL MI ‘DRA’O,,

When we hold objects to be substantial, in the sense of being self-standing, this again elicits in those objects an aspect of being desirable or undesirable; but this in itself is not enough to call the attendant emotions desire or hatred.  As such, the way we establish something as being attachment or repulsion in this case would as well be different.


[1585]
GTI MUG LA BRTEN PAR YANG ‘GYUR TE ZHES PA NI, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I GTI MUG SNGON DU SONG BAS CHAGS SOGS ‘DREN PA’I DON NO,,

Now when the citation states that “they all rely upon this ignorance,” the point is that dark ignorance where we hold that things exist by definition comes first, and then this elicits the attachment or whatever it may be.


[1586]
LUS LA LUS DBANG ZHES PA’I DPE NI, DBANG PO GZHAN BZHI LA LUS DBANG ZUR DU BZHAG PA’I RTEN MED PA BZHIN DU, NYON MONGS GZHAN THAMS CAD KYANG GTI MUG LA BRTEN NAS ‘JUG CING, DE DANG MI ‘BRAL BAR ‘JUG PA’I DON NO,,

Let’s return to that metaphor of the “powers of the body throughout the body.”  What this refers to is the fact that the other four physical powers have no home base apart from the power of the body.  Just so, all the other negative emotions too rely, upon dark ignorance, in order to engage in their various objects—and cannot engage divorced from this ignorance. 


[1587]
DES NA GTI MUG BCOM PA NYID KYIS NYON MONGS THAMS CAD ‘JOMS PAR ‘GYUR BAS, ‘DI’I GNYEN PO RTEN ‘BYUNG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA’I GTAM NYID LA GUS PAR BYA BAR GSUNGS SO,,

As such, the one & only way to destroy all our negative emotions is to destroy dark ignorance.  And because of that, the text is saying, we should honor this one antidote to the ignorance: the teachings upon dependence, the fact that things are empty of existing through any nature of their own.


[1588]
DNGOS PO BDEN ‘DZIN ‘DI NI ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BA’I MA RIG PAR YANG STONG NYID BDUN CU PA LAS GSUNGS SHING, RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LAS KYANG, 
,GANG YANG RUNG BA’I GNAS RNYED NA,
,NYON MONGS SBRUL GDUG G-YO CAN GYIS,
,ZIN PAR ‘GYUR RO GANG GI SEMS,
,GNAS MED DE DAG ZIN MI ‘GYUR,

The Seventy Verses also states that this tendency of holding things to be real constitutes the misunderstanding which is the root of the cycle of pain.  And the Sixty Verses says as well,

If some opportunity
Or another is found,

Then the deadly, devious viper
Of the negative emotions
Will catch us.

Those who never go
To this place
Will never be caught.


[1589]
ZHES BDEN [f. 119b] ‘DZIN GYI DMIGS GTAD GANG YANG RUNG BA’I GNAS SHIG RNYED NA, NYON MONGS PA’I SBRUL GYIS ‘DZIN PAR GSUNGS SHING,

What this is saying is that—when you come to any place at all where the tendency to believe things are real is seeing things—then you can be caught by the viper of the negative emotions.


[1590]
YANG DE NYID KYI MJUG THOGS SU,
,GNAS DANG BCAS PA’I SEMS LDAN LA,
,NYON MONGS DUG CHEN CIS MI ‘BYUNG,
,ZHES GSUNGS PAS ‘DI NI ‘PHAGS PA’I BZHED PA DAM PA’O,,

In its very next words, the Sixty then says:

Why wouldn’t the great venom
Of the negative emotions

Rise within a person
Who possesses a state of mind
With an opportunity?


[1591]
RKANG PA PHYI MA GNYIS KYI MTSAMS SBYOR DU, GANG DAG GZUGS LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN DMIGS KYANG, NYON MONGS PA RNAMS SPONG BAR ‘DOD PA DE DAG LA NI, NYON MONGS PA SPONG BA MI SRID PA NYID DO ZHES BSTEN {%BSTAN} PA’I PHYIR GSUNGS PA ZHES DANG,

In tying these latter lines to the rest, we see the following:

Suppose a person perceives some kind of nature to things like physical form or the like.  They may even be someone who truly hopes to rid themselves of the negative emotions—but for them, eliminating these emotions will be a complete impossibility.


[1592]
PHYI ‘GREL LAS KYANG, DNGOS POR DMIGS PA YIN NA NI ‘DOD CHAGS LA SOGS PA’I NYON MONGS PA RAB ‘BYAMS NGES PAR BZLOG TU MED PA RNAMS ‘BYUNG NGO,,

Subsequent comments here repeat—

And if they are seeing things as things, then ignorant liking & the rest—a whole myriad of negative emotions—will spring forth; and they will not be something that could ever be stopped.


[1593]
JI LTAR ZHE NA, RE ZHIG GAL TE DNGOS PO DE YID DANG MTHUN PA YIN NA NI, DE’I TSE DE LA RJES SU CHAGS PA BZLOG PAR DKA’O, ,CI STE MI MTHUN NA NI DE’I TSE DE LA KHONG KHRO NGA {%BA} DANG TSIG PA ZA BA BZLOG PAR DKA’O, ZHES GSUNGS SHING,

And how is that?  If at the moment these things fit the mind, then it will be difficult to stop desire for them.  If they do not, then it will be difficult to stop repulsion, and anger, for them.


[1594]
YUL DE YID DU ‘ONG MI ‘ONG GANG YANG MIN PA ZHIG NA’ANG MA RIG PA SKYE BAR ‘GREL PA LAS GSUNGS TE, YUL DE RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA CIG RGYUD LA ‘JUG BZHIN PA NA, YANG NA ‘DOD CHAGS, YANG NA ZHE SDANG SKYE DE GNYIS MIN NA’ANG GTI MUG GI RIGS ‘DRA ‘JUG PAR BZHED LA,

The commentary also says that misunderstanding will still arise even in a case where the object is neither attractive nor unattractive; for it takes the position that, so long as any tendency to hold things as existing by definition is operating within the mind, then desire or repulsion will arise and—even if neither does, at the moment—then a continued form of the dark ignorance will be in operation.


[1595]
SPYOD ‘JUG LAS KYANG,
,DMIGS PA DANG NI BCAS PA’I SEMS,
,’GA’ ZHIG LA NI GNAS PAR ‘GYUR,
,STONG PA NYID DANG BRAL BA’I SEMS,
,’GAGS PA SLAR [f. 120a] YANG SKYE ‘GYUR TE,
,’DU SHES MED PA’I SNYOMS ‘JUG BZHIN,

The Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life puts it this way:

It resides in any number
Of states of mind
Which still hold to this object;

And even stopped
It will rise again,
In a mind devoid of emptiness.

It’s just like the concentration
Where we stop discrimination.


[1596]
ZHES GSUNGS TE PHYOGS ‘DI LA SLOB DPON ‘DI GNYIS DANG SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS GSUM ‘PHAGS PA’I DGONGS PA ‘GREL PA LA KHYAD PAR MED DO,

On this issue, there is no difference at all in the way these three masters—the two mentioned here, and Buddha Palita—comment upon the thinking of the Arya.


[1597]
‘DI’I GNAD KYIS MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG GI LAM TZAM GYIS MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ BAR BSHAD PA NI DGONGS PA CAN YIN LA, LAM DE’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’I NYON MONGS KYI NGOS ‘DZIN RNAMS KYANG LHAG MA DANG BCAS PA YIN NO,,

Given this particular crucial point, the explanation that it is only through the path of the 16 aspects of impermanence and so on that we can achieve nirvana is shown to be figurative.  Methods of identifying the negative emotions relative to this path also refer to nirvana where something is still left over.


[1598]
DE DAG LA BRTEN NAS NGA RGYAL SOGS KYANG SHES PAR NUS LA, THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I MA RIG PA DANG ‘JIG LTA DANG MTHAR LTA LA YANG KUN BRTAGS DANG LHAN SKYES GNYIS KA SHES PAR BYA STE TSIG MANGS SU DOGS NAS MA BRIS SO,,

Based on our presentation so far, you can understand the situation with other negative emotions, such as pride.  You can also understand that there are learned & innate forms of this unique form of misunderstanding; and to the view of destruction; and to extreme views.  It is only out of fear for going on too long that I will avoid describing these details here in the present work.


[1599]
DE BZHIN DU CHOS RNAMS BDEN GRUB TU ‘DZIN PA’I RNAM RTOG LA SGOM SPANG CHE ‘BRING DGUR BYAS NAS, GNYEN PO SGOM LAM DGU DANG SBYOR BA YANG,

In the same manner, there has been presented a division of the misperception where we hold all objects to exist in truth into nine different states of mind that we must rid ourselves of during the path of habituation, based on whether they are greater or middling.  These are then matched to nine different antidotes during this path of habituation.


[1600]
GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD DU ‘DZIN PA’I RNAM RTOG LA SGOM SPANG CHE ‘BRING DGUR BYAS NAS, SGOM LAM DGU DANG SPANG GNYEN DU SBYOR BAR BSHAD PA BZHIN DU,

These are similar to explanations in which misperceptions where we hold that object states & subject states are of a different substance are also divided into nine elements that we must rid ourselves of on the path of habituation; again, with greater or middling versions.  And then these are matched to nine components of the path of habituation itself, as antidotes which would allow us to rid ourselves of the nine misperceptions.


[1601]
RE ZHIG LA CHOS KYI BDAG MED PHRA RAGS GNYIS KA RDZOGS PAR RTOGS MI NUS PA’I GDUL BYA ‘GA’ ZHIG GI NGOR GSUNGS PA’I DRANG BA’I DON DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Understand, again, that these though were not meant literally; they are pronouncements that were only meant for a number of disciples who, at that moment, were incapable of grasping, completely, both the subtle and gross forms of the lack of a self-nature to things.



Deception makes its appearance

[1602]
GNYIS PA NI,

Here is our second point from above, which is how the simple deception either makes its appearance, or does not make its appearance, to three different types of individuals.


[1603]
DNGOS PO ‘DI DAG KYANG BYIS PA RNAMS LA NI RANG BZHIN MED BZHIN DU DER SNANG BAS SLU BAR BYED LA, DE DAG LAS GZHAN SNGAR BSHAD PA’I GANG ZAG GSUM LA NI, BCOS MAR GYUR PA’I DNGOS PO’I RTEN [f. 120b] CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA NYID KYIS NI KUN RDZOB TZAM DU ‘GYUR GYI BDEN PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

These things, moreover, make their appearance to infants as though they had some nature of their own, even as they possess no such nature; that is, they deceive these people.  But to people other than these—which is to say, to the three types of individuals we mentioned above—the things exist as simply deceptive, through occurring in the dependent relationship of entities which are artificial.  They do not occur in any way which is true.


[1604]
DE YANG SHES SGRIB KYI MTSAN NYID CAN GYI NYON MONGS CAN MA YIN PA’I MA RIG PA TZAM KUN TU SPYOD PA’I PHYIR, MA RIG PA DANG DE’I BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD PA’I SNANG BA DANG BCAS PA’I SPYOD YUL CAN GYI RJES THOB LA GNAS PA’I ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS LA SNANG GI, ‘PHAGS PA SNANG BA MED PA’I SPYOD YUL MNGA’ BA MNYAM GZHAG LA GNAS PA RNAMS LA NI SNANG BA MIN NO,,

These things make their appearance to realized beings who are in the aftermath period; to those who minds are engaging in objects where there is still an appearance infected by misunderstanding and its deep seeds.  And this is because they still engage habitually through simple misunderstanding which is not involved with nedgative emotions; rather, it displays the defining characteristics of an obstacle to omniscience.  It is not though the case that these same objects make their appearance to realized beings who possess an object of engagement where there is no impression of self-existence; that is to say, to such beings who are still in that particular deep, balanced meditation.


[1605]
‘O NA LUGS ‘DIS SHES SGRIB GANG LA BYED CE NA,

At this point, one may ask—

Well then, in this system what is it that they consider an obstacle to omniscience?


[1606]
‘JUG ‘GREL LAS, DE LA MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS NI SHES BYA YONGS SU GCOD PA’I GEGS SU GYUR PA YIN LA, ‘DOD CHAGS LA SOGS PA’I BAG CHAGS YOD PA NI LUS DANG NGAG DAG GI ‘JUG PA DE LTA BU’I RGYU YANG YIN TE, MA RIG PA DANG ‘DOD CHAGS LA SOGS PA’I BAG CHAGS DE YANG RNAM PA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA DANG, SANGS RGYAS KHO NA LA LDOG PAR ‘GYUR GYI, GZHAN DAG LA NI MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR TE,

The case here is as we see it described in the autocommentary:

As for this, the deep seeds for misunderstanding act as an obstacle to separating out all knowable things; when we still possess the deep seeds for desire and the rest, they further act as a cause for engagement of this type by the two of body & speech.  The deep seeds for misunderstanding and desire and the like prevent only the state of omniscience, and enlightenment; but they do not stop the others.


[1607]
LUS DANG NGAG GI ‘JUG PA NI DGRA BCOM PA LA YOD PA SPRE’U LTAR MCHONG BA DANG, GZHAN LA RMANGS MO ZHES ZER BA’I LUS NGAG GI GNAS NGAN LEN STON PAS BKAG KYANG MA LOG PA LTA BU YIN NO,,

When the text here mentions that “engagement of body & speech” are possessed by an enemy destroyer, it refers to slight negative tendencies such as hopping like a monkey, or calling somebody a “housmaid.”  These were prohibited by the Teacher but in these cases the person has not been able to fully stop doing them.


[1608]
YANG ZHES PAS CHAGS SOGS KYI BAG CHAGS SHES BYA GCOD PA’I GEGS SU YANG BSTAN PAS, NYON MONGS PA’I BAG CHAGS RNAMS SHES SGRIB YIN TE, DE’I ‘BRAS BU GNYIS SNANG ‘KHRUL PA’I CHA THAMS CAD KYANG DER BSDU’O,,

When the text here says “further” act, it is indicating that deep seeds such as attachment and the like are as well obstacles to separating out all knowable things.  Thus we can say that the deep seeds for what is involved with negative emotions are obstacles to knowledge.  And as for their results, all states where we make errors due to the discrepancy between what is actually there and what appears to be there can be included here.


[1609]
NYON MONGS KYI SA BON LA BAG CHAGS SU BZHAG PA [f. 121a] CIG DANG, NYON MONGS KYI SA BON MIN PA’I BAG CHAGS GNYIS LAS SHES SGRIB TU ‘JOG PA NI PHYI MA STE, NYON MONGS KYI SA BON THAMS CAD ZAD PAS BDEN ‘DZIN MI SKYE YANG, BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD PAS SNANG YUL LA ‘KHRUL PA’I BLO SKYED PA’O,,

Deep seeds can be divided into two types: those which can be classified as seeds for negative emotions, and those which are not seeds for negative emotions.  Those that we classify as obstacles to knowledge are the latter.  That is, when we have finished off all our seeds for negative emotions, the tendency to hold things as real no longer arises; but because we are still infected by deep seeds, we do experience the arisal of states of mind that are mistaken towards the object as it appears to them.


[1610]
SANGS MA RGYAS PA’I ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS KYIS NI SHES SGRIB KYI MA RIG PA MA SPANGS PAS, RJES THOB KYI SNANG BCAS KYI RTOG PA DANG, MNYAM GZHAG TU SNANG MED DU ‘GYUR BA’I RES ‘JOG YOD LA,

Realized beings who are not yet enlightened have not yet eliminated misunderstanding in the form of an obstacle to knowledge; as such, they can experience an alternation of their mental state between perceptions—during the aftermath period—where they still have the appearance of things existing in truth; and those during that deep meditation, where this appearance is no longer there.


[1611]
SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS NI CHOS THAMS CAD KYI DON DAM PA DANG KUN RDZOB PA’I RNAM PA MNGON PAR TE MNGON DU GYUR PAR RDZOGS PAR TE MA LUS PAR, BYANG CHUB PA STE RTOGS PA’I PHYIR SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG GI RNAM RTOG GI RGYU BA THAMS CAD GTAN LOG PAS, MNYAM GZHAG DANG RJES THOB KYI SNANG BA’I RTOG PA YOD MED RES ‘JOG PA MED DO,,

For those who are enlightened, both the ultimate aspects of all existing entities, and their deceptive aspects as well, are evident: are experienced in a completely manifest manner—meaning that they are enlightened in their entirety, in their realizations.  And this means that the entire circulation of wrong ideas with their mind & mental functions is shut down completely, and permanently.  As such there is no alternation—in their case—between ideas of self-existence or a lack of these ideas, depending on whether they are in that deep meditation, or in the aftermath period.


[1612]
GTAN ZHES PA’I TSIG GIS ‘PHAGS PA GZHAN LA MNYAM GZHAG TU LOG PA NI RES ‘GA’ BAR STON LA, DE’I PHYIR MNYAM RJES RES ‘JOG PA YOD DO,,

When we use the word “permanently” in this last section, it is meant to indicate that—for other realized beings—the stopping of those thoughts during the deep meditation is a state which then fluctuates; and this is why we say that they alternate between deep meditation and its aftermath.


[1613]
DES NA SHES SGRIB KYI MA RIG PA SPYOD PA’I PHYIR, ZHES PA NI SNANG BA YOD PA’I RGYU MTSAN MIN GYI, MNYAM RJES SU SNANG BA YOD MED RES ‘JOG TU ‘BYUNG BA’I SGRUB BYED DO,,

Therefore when we speak of “misunderstanding engaging in the form of an obstacle to knowledge,” it’s not because there is an appearance of things as being self-existence; rather, we are simply establishing that things are alternating at that point: one possesses, and then doesn’t possess, an appearance of things as self-existent, in states inside of the deep meditation and then subsequent to that state.


[1614]
SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG GI RGYU BA NI RNAM RTOG LA BZHED PA YIN TE, TSIG GSAL LAS, RNAM PAR RTOG PA NI SEMS KYI RGYU BA YIN NA DE DANG BRAL BA’I PHYIR, DE KHO NA NYID DE NI RNAM PAR RTOG PA MED PA YIN NO,,
JI SKAD DU MDO LAS, DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA GANG ZHE NA, GANG LA [f. 121b] SEMS KYI RGYU BA YANG MED NA, YI GE RNAMS LTA SMOS KYANG CI DGOS ZHES GSUNGS SO, ZHES BSHAD DO,,

It’s being accepted that when in this case we talk about “the circulation of mind & mental functions,” it involves wrong ideas; as A Clarification of the Verses explains it—

If wrong ideas involve the circulation of the mind, then with suchness there are no wrong ideas, since at that point we are free of any such circulation.  As sutra itself puts it, “What then is ultimate reality?  It is a state where there is not even any circulation of the mind; what need mention then that there could be no syllables there?”



Ultimate reality, to a common being

[1615]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third step from above: a description of the way in which things can become either ultimate or deceptive, relative to a common being, or a realized being.


[1616]
DE LA SO SO’I SKYE BO RNAMS KYI DON DAM PA GANG YIN PA DE NYID, ‘PHAGS PA SNANG BA DANG BCAS PA’I SPYOD YUL CAN RNAMS KYI KUN RDZOB TZAM YIN LA, DE’I RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI DE RNAMS KYI DON DAM PA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I

Let’s consider then what is ultimate reality to common beings; that same thing is nothing more than deceptive reality to realized beings who are engaging in an object of perception while still seeing it appear to them as self-existent.  And yet still, whatever nature these things have of being emptiness “is, for them, ultimate reality.”


[1617]
SNGA MA’I DON NI, SO SKYES DON DAM PAR GRUB PAR BZUNG BA’I BUM SOGS DE NYID, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I ‘PHAGS PA GSUM MNYAM GZHAG LAS LANGS PA’I RJES THOB SNANG BA CAN RNAMS KYI KUN RDZOB TZAM YIN PAR BSTAN PAS,

What the first part of this last statement is saying is that those same objects which common beings hold to exist in an ultimate way—water pitchers and the like—are nothing more than deceptive objects for perceptions of the three types of realized beings described before who have come out of their deep meditation on emptiness, and to whom objects are appearing in a self-existent way.
 

[1618]
DE RNAMS KYI NGOR BDEN PA TZAM GCOD KYI KUN RDZOB BDEN PA YIN PA MI GCOD CING, SO SKYES BUM SOGS LA DON DAM DU GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I ZHEN YUL ‘PHAGS PA LA KUN RDZOB TU ‘GYUR BAR STON PA MIN TE DE MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO,,

To their perceptions, deceptive reality in the form of the simple exclusion of a thing having real existence is not itself prevented; and we are not saying that, to a realized being, the things that common beings believe are there when they hold a water pitcher or the like to exist ultimately are present in a deceptive way—for that would be impossible.


[1619]
GZHUNG PHYI MA’I DON NI RTEN ‘BREL KUN RDZOB PA’I RANG BZHIN CHOS NYID ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS KYI DON DAM PAR STON PAS BUM PA LA SOGS PA’I GZHI GCIG NYID, SO SKYE LA LTOS NAS KUN RDZOB DANG, ‘PHAGS PA LA LTOS NAS DON DAM MO, ZHES GZHUNG LAS PHYIN CI LOG TU BZLOG STE SMRA BA NI, BLO GANG GI NGOR KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR SONG BA DE’I NGOR BDEN PA KHEGS DGOS PA MA SHES PA’I GTAM MO,,

The point of the latter part of that last statement is to indicate that the very nature of things—in the form of dependent events being the nature of the deception—is what the ultimate is, for realized beings.  As such, let us consider the position where someone states that nothing more than a single instance of a water pitcher, or the like, could at the same time be deceptive to a common being, and ultimate to a realized being.  This is a reversal of the whole idea of scripture at this juncture; this kind of talk reflects a failure to understand the idea that—once something represents deceptive reality appearing to a particular state of mind—this necessarily disallows the idea that the same object could represent truth to the same state of mind.


[1620]
SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI DON DAM PA NI RANG BZHIN NYID YIN ZHING, DE YANG SLU BA MED PA NYID KYIS DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA YIN LA, DE NI DE RNAMS KYIS SO SO RANG GIS RIG PAR BYA BA YIN NO, ZHES [f. 122a] GSUNGS SO,,

As the scripture itself states,

What represents the ultimate for the Enlightened Ones is the one true nature of things; and this is the ultimate form of reality, for it can never deceive us.  And this is what that one thing which these beings, each one, realize really is.


[1621]
RANG BZHIN NYID YIN ZHING ZHES PA’I NYID KYI SGRA NI NGES GZUNG YIN LA, DES GANG GCOD PA NI ‘PHAGS PA GZHAN RNAMS KYI DON DAM BDEN PA NI MNYAM GZHAG TU SNANG MED KYI RANG BZHIN DANG, RJES THOB TU SNANG BCAS KYI RANG BZHIN DU ‘JOG PA LTA BU’I RES ‘JOG MIN PAR, DUS RTAG TU RANG BZHIN LA MNYAM PAR BZHAG PA’I CHOS NYID YIN ZHES PA’O,,

The “one true” in the expression here, “it is the one true nature of things,” is meant in a sense of unique identification; that is, it is meant to exclude something else: a kind of alternating back and forth, where—for other realized beings—ultimate reality might be said to have a nature of not appearing to be self-existent during that deep meditation, and then appearing to be self-existent during the aftermath of the meditation.  And so what the expression is meant to say is that it is the very nature of things for someone who is at all times, for all eternity, within that deep meditation on the way things are.


[1622]
DE YANG ZHES SOGS KYI DON NI DON DAM BDEN PA’I BDEN PA DE BDEN GRUB MA YIN PAR BSTAN PAR BZHED NAS, DE KHO NA NYID GZIGS PA’I NGOR SLU BA MED PAR GNAS PA BDEN PA’I DON DU BSHAD DO,,

Moreover, the part in this citation which begins with “and this is” is meant by the author to indicate that the reality in ultimate reality is not something which exists really: what he’s saying is that what it means to be “real” is where—to the perceptions of these beings as they view suchness—things exist in a way where they are no longer deceiving anyone.



Not, in fact, indescribable

[1623]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, RTZA BA’I TSIG DON BSHAD PA DANG, DE LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: an explanation of that reality which is ultimate.  We proceed in two steps: an explanation of the words of the root text at this point, and then a refutation of argument concerning their meaning.  Here is the first.


[1624]
DE NI DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA BSTAN PAR ‘DOD PAS, DON DAM BDEN PA DE NI SGRAS BRJOD DU MED PA’I PHYIR DANG, SGRA DE’I RJES SU ‘BRANG BA’I SHES PA’I YUL MA YIN PA NYID KYI PHYIR, DNGOS SU BSTAN PAR MI NUS PAS NYAN ‘DOD PA RNAMS LA DE’I RANG BZHIN GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU SO SKYE RANG GIS MYONG BA’I DPE BSHAD PA,

What this is talking about is the following.  What we hope to present is the idea of a reality which is ultimate; but ultimate reality is not something that one can describe in words; neither will it act as an object of the state of mind which follows upon such words.  As such, this reality is not something that we could describe in a direct manner; and so to elucidate its nature to those who wish to hear more about it, we will need to employ an example which is something that common beings have some experience of.


[1625]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I SHES BRJOD KYI YUL MIN PA’I DON NI DNGOS SU BSTAN PAR MI NUS PAS ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR TE, DE YANG NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS MNGON SUM DU BSTAN PAR MI NUS ZHES ‘BYUNG BA’O,,

When this kind of statement indicates that ultimate reality cannot be an object of either knowledge or expression, it’s in effect saying, “Because it cannot be directly indicated.”  In fact, Naktso’s translation at this point says “It is not something which can be indicated directly.”


[1626]
DE’I DON NI DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON GZHAN LAS SHES PAR BYA BA MIN PAR GSUNGS PA’I ‘GREL PA TSIG GSAL LAS, JI LTAR RAB RIB CAN DAG GIS SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA’I NGO BO PHYIN CI LOG PA [f. 122b] MTHONG BA NA, RAB RIB MED PAS BSTAN DU ZIN KYANG, RAB RIB MED PA LTAR SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA RANG GI NGO BO MA MTHONG BA’I TSUL GYIS, RTOGS PAR BYA BA JI LTAR GNAS PA BZHIN RTOGS PAR MI NUS KYI,

The point here is explained by A Clarification of the Verses, commenting upon statements that the meaning of suchness is not something that can be learned from others:

Suppose that those with cataracts see, mistakenly, something with the nature of a strand of hair, or the like.  Someone who has no such cataracts can explain the situation to them, but still they will not be able to stop themselves from seeing the thing as having the nature of a hair or the like.  As such, we say that a person is unable to understand something in the same way it exists for someone who does understand the thing; but rather…


[1627]
ZHES RAB RIB CAN LA RAB RIB MED PAS SKRA SHAD MED DO ZHES BSTAN KYANG, RAB RIB MED PAS MTHONG BA ‘DRA BA’I SKRA SHAD MED PA MI RTOGS PAR GSUNGS PAS, NYAN PA POS DE LTAR MA RTOGS KYANG SKRA SHAD MED PA MI RTOGS PA MIN NO,,

What this is saying is that a person who has no cataracts can say to a person who still does have them, “There’s no strand of hair there!”—but the latter person will not be able to realize the lack of a hair there in the same way that the person with no cataracts sees this.  We can say though that even though the person listening to the correct explanation cannot realize this object in the same way, it’s not though the case that they have no realization at all then that there is no hair there.


[1628]
DE DPER BYAS NAS DE KHO NA NYID BSTAN PA MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB KYI BSLAD PA DANG BRAL BAS MTHONG BA ‘DRA BA CIG MI RTOGS KYANG, SPYIR DE KHO NA NYID MI RTOGS PA MIN PAR BZHED PAS NA,

We use this situation then as a metaphor for teaching someone about suchness.  Even though this person will not realize the actual situation in the same way as a person who is free of any perceptual infection by the cataracts of misunderstanding, we would still say that they are not—generally speaking—a person who has no understanding of suchness at all.


[1629]
DON DAM BDEN PA NI ZAB MO’I DON CAN GYI NGES DON GYI LUNG DANG, DE LTAR STON PA’I NGAG GIS BRJOD MI NUS PA DANG, DE’I RJES SU ‘BRANG BA’I BLOS KYANG RTOGS MI NUS PA MIN TE, DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON SHES BRJOD KYI YUL MIN PAR GSUNGS PA THAMS CAD LA YANG DE BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Thus then we can say that it is not the case that ultimate reality is not something which can be described through teachings which address the profound nature of things in a literal manner; or that this reality could never be elucidated in speech which describes it in this way; or that it would be impossible to grasp with a state of mind following after such descriptions.  You should understand then all such references—those which say that the meaning of suchness is not an object perceivable through thought or description—in the same way as we have described it here.


The ultimate reality of the Buddhas

	[1630]
	[VI.29]
Vikalpitaṃ yat timira prabhāvāt
Keśādi rūpaṃ vitathaṃ tad eva,
Yenātmanā paśyati śuddha dṛṣṭis
tat tattvam ityevam ihāpyavaihi.

,RAB RIB MTHU YIS SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA’I,
,NGO BO LOG PA GANG ZHIG RNAM BRTAGS PA,
,DE NYID BDAG NYID GANG DU MIG DAG PAS,
,MTHONG DE DE NYID DE BZHIN ‘DIR SHES KYIS {%GYIS},

	Suppose that a person,
	Due to some cataracts,
	Thinks they see something
	As different than it really is:

	They perceive a strand
	Of hair, or something of the like.

	And now suppose a person
	With clear eyes looks down
	Where those actual things
	Are supposed to be.
	
	They are the one
	Who sees the real;

	Understand the case here
	As being the same.


[1631]
MIG RAB RIB KYIS BSLAD PA’I MTHU YIS RAB RIB CAN GYIS RANG GI LAG GI BSE RU LA SOGS PA’I BZA’ BTUNG GI SNOD KYI NANG DU, SKRA SHAD DANG LA SOGS PAS SBRANG MA LA SOGS PA MTHONG BA NA,

Suppose then that—due to the fact that a person’s eyes are infected with some cataracts—a person who possesses such optical defects looks into a cup of horn held in their hand (or any similar vessel for eating or drinking), and perceives there a strand of hair “or something of the like” (which words indicate anything similar perceived inside the cup; say, a fly or the like).


[1632]
SKRA SHAD DANG SBRANG MA SOGS YIN PAR NGO BO LOG PA GANG ZHIG RNAM PAR BRTAGS PA NA, DE BSAL BAR ‘DOD NAS SNOD DE LA YANG DANG YANG DU BSGRE BZLOG BYED PA’I TSEGS THOB PAR RIG STE,

When they think that they see something then, as different than it really is—when they see the hair or the fly or whatever it may be—then naturally they would want to get it out of the cup, and so it would be completely appropriate for them to go to the trouble of turning the cup upside down and knocking it against the table repeatedly, to get the unwanted thing out.


[1633]
MIG DAG PA’I RAB RIB MED PAS DE’I GAN DU PHYIN NAS, SKRA SHAD SOGS DE DAG NYID KYI BDAG NYID GZHI GANG DU MTHONG BA DER MIG GTAD [f. 123a] KYANG SKRA SHAD KYI RNAM PA DE DAG MA DMIGS SHING, SKRA SHAD DE’I RTEN CAN TE KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS GANG YANG RTOG PAR MI BYED DO,,

And then suppose that a person with clear eyes—someone without any cataracts—walks over to this other fellow and looks down to the spot where the first person thought they saw one of those actual things: the strand of hair or the like.  


[1634]
YANG GANG GI TSE RAB RIB CAN GYIS RAB RIB MED PA LA, SKRA SHAD MTHONG NGO ZHES RANG GI BSAM PA STON PAR BYED PA DE’I TSE,

And suppose then that the person with the cataracts expresses what they think to the person who has no cataracts: “I see a strand of hair there.”


[1635]
RAB RIB CAN GYI RNAM RTOG BSAL BAR ‘DOD PAS DE’I NGOR BYAS NAS, ‘DI NA SKRA SHAD MED DO ZHES DGAG PA LHUR BYED PA’I TSIG SMRA MOD KYANG, SMRA BA PO ‘DI LA SKRA SHAD LA SKUR PA ‘DEBS PA MED DO,,

This other person will naturally then want to clear up the misperception that the one with the cataracts is having, and will do their very best to say something to help them stop their mistake: “But look, actually there’s no strand of hair there at all.”  We could not though in this case say that the speaker was trying to deny a hair that was actually there.


[1636]
RAB RIB CAN GYIS MTHONG BA’I SKRA SHAD KYI DE KHO NA NYID NI, RAB RIB MED PAS MTHONG BA DE YIN GYI, RAB RIB CAN GYIS MTHONG BA DE MIN NO,,

The one who sees the real nature—the suchness—of the hair that the person with the cataracts perceives is the person without the cataracts; it is not in fact something that the person with the cataracts is capable of perceiving.


[1637]
DPE GNYIS PO DE BZHIN DU DON GYI SKABS ‘DIR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

Understand the case here as being the same, as we’ve described it with the referents of our two examples.


[1638]
,SHES PAR BYED TSUL NI, MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB KYIS GNOD PA BYAS PA STE BLO BSLAD PAS DE KHO NA NYID MA MTHONG BA RNAMS KYIS, PHUNG PO DANG KHAMS DANG SKYE MCHED LA SOGS PA’I RANG GI NGO BO DMIGS PA NI, PHUNG SOGS DE DAG GI NGO BO KUN RDZOB PA STE RAB RIB CAN GYIS SKRA SHAD DMIGS PA LTA BU’O,,

And just how should we accomplish this understanding?  Those who are being hurt by the cataracts of misunderstanding—those whose minds are infected—cannot see the real nature of things: their suchness.  When they look upon the nature of the parts of a person; and the categories of things; and the doors of sense and all of the like, they see the nature of these things that deceives.  They are just like those people with cataracts, who perceive a strand of hair.


[1639]
PHUNG PO LA SOGS PA DE NYID MA MTHONG BAS DMIGS PA DE DAG NYID, MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS SHES SGRIB DANG BRAL BA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS,

But let’s consider, instead, those who do not see these same parts to a person, and the rest.  Here we are talking about the Buddhas, who are considering these same objects, but free of the obstacles to knowledge: free of the deep seeds for misunderstanding.


[1640]
RAB RIB CAN MA YIN PA’I MIG GIS SKRA SHAD MA MTHONG BA’I TSUL DU, PHUNG SOGS KYI RANG BZHIN GANG DU GZIGS PA’I YUL DE NI SANGS RGYAS DE RNAMS KYI DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA’O,,

They are considering these things just as the person whose eyes have no cataracts, and who sees no strands of hair.  They look at the same thing—the same parts of the person and so on that were seen as having some nature of their own—and perceive it as the ultimate reality of the Buddhas.



Knowing by failing to see

[1641]
GNYIS PA NI,

This then brings us to our second point from above: refuting rebuttal upon the points we’ve made.


[1642]
GAL TE RAB RIB MED PA’I MIG GIS SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA TZAM YANG MA MTHONG BA BZHIN DU, SANGS [f. 123b] RGYAS KYIS MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA’I BLO LA SNANG BA’I PHUNG SOGS KUN RDZOB PA MA GZIGS NA, DE RNAMS MED PAR ‘GYUR TE, YOD NA NI SANGS RGYAS KYIS GZIGS DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO, ,PHUNG SOGS KUN RDZOB PA RNAMS MED NA NI SANGS RGYAS THOB PA YANG MED PAR ‘GYUR TE, DANG POR SEMS BSKYED PA’I GANG ZAG NI MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

One may come then with the following argument:

A person whose eyes are free of any cataracts doesn’t perceive even the false appearance of a strand of hair.  And a Buddha could never perceive the deceptive forms of the parts to a person and so on which make their appearance to a state of mind which is infected by misunderstanding.  And that’s simply because—if anything does in fact exist—then it has to be seen by an Enlightened Being.  But if, on the other hand, the deceptive forms of the parts to a person and so on didn’t exist at all, then there would exist no such thing as someone achieving enlightenment.  And that in turn is because a person who first attains the Wish to achieve enlightenment for all living beings is someone who is still infected by misunderstanding.


[1643]
SKYON ‘DI MED TSUL BSHAD NA, SANGS RGYAS KYI YE SHES KYIS SHES BYA MKHYEN TSUL NI GNYIS TE, DON DAM BDEN PA’I SHES BYA THAMS CAD MKHYEN TSUL DANG, KUN RDZOB BDEN PA’I SHES BYA THAMS CAD MKHYEN TSUL LO,,

If we were to explain how this problem is not one which is really there, we can begin by saying that there are two different ways in which the wisdom of an Enlightened Being knows all knowable things.  They know all knowable things within ultimate reality; and they know all knowable things within deceptive reality.


[1644]
DE LA DANG PO NI, PHUNG PO LA SOGS PA KUN RDZOB PA’I SNANG BA RNAMS MA GZIGS PA’I TSUL GYIS, DE RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID MKHYEN PA’O,,

In the first way of knowing here, the Enlightened Beings fail to see the deceptive appearance of the parts to a person and so on; and in this manner then they know the true nature of these things.



How Buddhas know the deceptive

[1645]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to how Buddhas know all existing objects of deceptive reality.


[1646]
MI SNANG YANG RTOGS PA’I SHUGS RTOGS SANGS RGYAS LA GZHAG TU MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR, SNANG NAS MKHYEN DGOS PAS JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES DE’I NGOR, YUL DANG YUL CAN GNYIS SU SNANG BA’I TSUL GYIS MKHYEN PA’O,,

Now it would be inappropriate to say—with Enlightened Beings—that they perceived an object by implication of another perception, even though that object was not appearing to them.  As such, they have to perceive things through those objects making an appearance to them.  As such, we have to say that—to the perceptions of an Enlightened Being where they see the total number of different entities in the universe—they perceive these entities by means of both the objects and their subjects appearing to them, as two.


[1647]
SANGS RGYAS KYI JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PA DE MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD NAS PHUNG SOGS SNANG BA MIN KYANG, GANG ZAG GZHAN GYI SHES PA MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA LA SNANG BA SANGS RGYAS LA SNANG DGOS TE, SNANG BA DE MED PAR MI RUNG LA KUN RDZOB DE YOD NA JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PAS DMIGS DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is not the case that the knowledge of an Enlightened Being which knows all the things to be known assumes the appearance of the parts to a person and so forth due to some infection by the deep seeds of misunderstanding.  Nonetheless, the way it has to work is that the appearance that makes itself known to the perceptions of other individuals whose minds are infected by misunderstanding makes its own appearance to these Buddhas.  This is because it would be wrong to say that there were no such appearance at all; while at the same time—if the deceptive is something that exists—then it must be perceived by the knowledge of an Enlightened Being which perceives the total quantity of knowable objects.


[1648]
RAB RIB DANG BRAL BA’I MIG SHES LA, RAB RIB CAN LA SNANG BA’I SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA MED KYANG, SNANG BA DE MED MI DGOS PAS SANGS RGYAS DANG MI ‘DRA’O,,

There is no such thing as something making its appearance as the strand of hair that appears to a person who has cataracts, as one which appears to a person whose visual consciousness is free of such cataracts.  Nonetheless, it is not the case that the appearance would have to be something that did not exist; thus the case is different from that with an Enlightened Being.


[1649]
[f. 124a] GNYIS SNANG ‘KHRUL PA’I BAG CHAGS MA ZAD KYI BAR DU JI LTA BA DANG, JI SNYED PA MNGON SUM DU ‘JAL BA GNYIS NGO BO GCIG TU SKYE MI NUS PAS, MNYAM RJES RES ‘JOG TU ‘JAL DGOS PAS YE SHES SKAD CIG MA GCIG GI STENG NAS DE GNYIS ‘JAL BA MI ‘ONG NGO,,

Until the day when we are able to finish off those deep mental seeds for the mistake—for the discrepancy between what appears and what is actually there—it can never be the case that our direct encounter with the way that all things exist, and with the total quantity of things that exist, could ever arise as a case where to be one were to be the other.  That is, we would have to commune with these two in alternation, between states of deep meditation and the periods subsequent to those states.  Thus then there would be no instance where we communed with both, within a single millisecond of wisdom.


[1650]
‘KHRUL PA’I BAG CHAGS MA LUS PAR SPANGS PA NA, YE SHES SKAD CIG MA RE RE’I STENG DU YANG YE SHES GNYIS NGO BO GCIG TU SKYE BA RGYUN MI CHAD PAS, DUS GCIG TU SHES BYA GNYIS MNGON SUM DU  ‘JAL MI ‘JAL GYI RES ‘JOG MI DGOS SO,,

While we have yet to eliminate each & every one of the deep seeds for the mistake, then even relative to each individual instant of wisdom there is an unbroken flow of the two forms of wisdom arising as a single entity; as such, it is not necessary that in any particular moment we alternate, in the sense of both directly engaging in, and not directly engaging in, a particular object of knowledge.


[1651]
DES NA,
,MKHYEN PA’I SKAD CIG GCIG GIS KYANG,
,SHES BYA’I DKYIL ‘KHOR KUN KHYAB CAN,
ZHES GSUNGS PA YANG MI ‘GAL LO,,

This then is why we can say that our presentation is not in contradiction with the lines that say—

	Even a single instant
	Of their knowledge

	Extends over the entire realm
	Of every knowable thing.


[1652]
YE SHES GNYIS NGO BO GCIG YIN KYANG YUL GNYIS LA LTOS PA’I MKHYEN TSUL MI ‘DRA BA GNYIS ‘ONG BA LA ‘GAL BA CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PA NI,

And there is not the slightest contradiction in saying that—even though two instances of wisdom are such that to be one is to be the other—relative to two different objects we could see two disparate manners of knowing.


[1653]
SANGS RGYAS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS NYAG GCIG GI KHYAD CHOS SU ‘DUG PA LA, DE KHO NA NYID KYI MKHYEN TSUL GCIG PU SANGS RGYAS KYI MKHYEN TSUL DU BYAS NAS, JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PA SANGS RGYAS KYI THUGS RGYUD LA MED PAR GDUL BYA’I RGYUD KYIS BSDUS ZHES,

This is in fact a particular feature only of a Conquering Buddha.  Yes, we do see people who say that the way an Enlightened Being perceives suchness, taken by itself, is the way that Buddhas know things; and that no Buddha possesses, in their mindstream, a knowledge of all the separate knowable things there are—that this is actually included into the mind of the particular disciples.


[1654]
SANGS RGYAS KYI JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PA LA SKUR PA ‘DEBS PA DANG, KHA CIG JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA YANG SANGS RGYAS KYI THUGS RGYUD LA MED CES YE SHES GNYIS KA LA SKUR PA ‘DEBS PAR SNANG NGO,,

It would appear though that people who take this position are discounting the the way in which a Buddha knows all the different things there are; while those who go further and say that neither is there any knowledge of the way things are in the mindstream of an Enlightened Being are discounting both forms of wisdom.


[1655]
‘DI’I LHAG MA ‘GA’ ZHIG ‘BRAS BU’I SKABS SU BSHAD PAR BYA’O,,

I will cover a few remaining points in this regard, when we get to the section about results.


[1656]
GAL TE GNYIS SNANG THAMS CAD NUB PA RNAM PA DE LTA BU’I RANG BZHIN NI [f. 124b] MTHONG BA MED PA MA YIN NAM, DES NA JI LTAR SANGS RGYAS DE DAG GIS DON DAM BDEN PA GZIGS SHE NA,

One may come then with the following question—

Let’s consider a case where all instances of the discrepancy between what appears and what is actually there have subsided, for a particular person; aren’t you saying then that this type of situation is not something where that discrepancy is not perceived?  Isn’t this exactly how Enlightened Beings see ultimate reality?


[1657]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI GZIGS NGOR GNYIS SNANG NUB PAS GNYIS KYI TSUL GYIS MI GZIGS PA NI BDEN MOD KYI, ‘ON KYANG MA GZIGS PA’I TSUL GYIS DE DAG GIS GZIGS SO ZHES BRJOD DO,,

It is true that—to the state of mind perceiving suchness—all appearances of the discrepancy have subsided; and that therefore these beings do not see things in these two different modes.  What we say though is that they do their seeing by way of not seeing.


[1658]
‘DI RTZOD PA’I LAN DU ‘GRO TSUL NI, JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES DES PHUNG SOGS KYI DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, PHUNG SOGS RNAMS GZIGS NGO DER MA GRUB PA DE DAG GI DE KHO NA NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, PHUNG SOGS MA GZIGS PA’I TSUL GYIS DE DAG GI DE KHO NA NYID GZIGS DGOS PA’I PHYIR TE,

How exactly does this point function to address that last objection?  First of all, the wisdom of a Buddha which perceives the way in which all things exist sees—directly—the true nature of the parts to the person, and so on.  And the way that these parts and the like do not exist to these perceptions is in fact the true nature of those entities.  Finally, these beings have to perceive the true nature of these objects through their way of not seeing these parts, and the rest.


[1659]
RANG ‘GREL LAS, DNGOS PO BYAS PA CAN LA MA REG PAR RANG BZHIN ‘BA’ ZHIG MNGON SUM DU MDZAD PAS, DE NYID THUGS SU CHUD PA’I PHYIR SANGS RGYAS ZHES BRJOD DO,

The autocommentary puts it this way:

They make no contact with entities that involved having been produced; rather, the only thing they have a direct knowledge of is their true nature.  It is in fact because they grasp this, that we can call them “Buddhas.”


[1660]
ZHES SANGS RGYAS KYI DON DAM MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES KYIS CHOS CAN LA MA REG PAR CHOS NYID ‘BA’ ZHIG THUGS SU CHUD PAR GSUNGS TE, PHUNG SOGS MA GZIGS PA’I TSUL GYIS DE DAG GI DE KHO NA NYID GZIGS PAR GSUNGS PA DANG DON GCIG GO

What this is saying is that the ultimate knowledge of a Buddha comprehends the real nature of an object at hand without making contact with the object which possesses that nature.  This is the same point we are making when we say that they see the true nature of the parts to the person and so on by way of not perceiving them.


[1661]
,MTHONG BA MED PA NI MTHONG BA DAM PA’O ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON YANG, CI YANG MI MTHONG BA MTHONG BAR MI BZHED KYI, SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR SPROS PA MA MTHONG BA NI SPROS BRAL MTHONG BAR ‘JOG PAS, MTHONG MA MTHONG GZHI GCIG LA BYED PA MIN NO,,

As they say, “Not seeing at all is the very highest form of seeing”; and here’s what that means.  We are not taking the position that not seeing is seeing; rather, as we pointed out before, we are establishing the not seeing of false projections as being seeing things without such projections.  It’s not that we can say both “you see it” and “you don’t see it” with regard to one object at one time.


[1662]
DE LTAR YANG SDUD PA LAS,

The Brief Presentation of the Perfection of Wisdom says it this way—


	[1663]
,GZUGS RNAMS MI MTHONG TSOR BA DAG KYANG
MI MTHONG ZHING,
,’DU SHES [f. 125a] MTHONG BA MED LA SEMS PA
MI MTHONG ZHING,
,GANG LA RNAM PAR SHES DANG SEMS YID
MTHONG MED PA,
,’DI NI CHOS MTHONG YIN ZHES DE BZHIN
GSHEGS PAS BSTAN,

	They see no body,
	And they see no feelings;

	They see no discrimination,
	And see no thinking;

	Neither do they see awareness,
	Or the mind, or the thoughts.

	And then this is what
	The Ones Gone Thus

	Teach as being
	Seeing what things are.


	[1664]
,NAM MKHA’ MTHONG ZHES SEMS CAN TSIG
TU RAB BRJOD PA,
,NAM MKHA’ JI LTAR MTHONG STE DES ‘DI
BRTAG PAR GYIS,
,DE LTAR CHOS MTHONG BA YANG DE BZHIN
GSHEGS PAS BSTAN,
,MTHONG BA DPE GZHAN GYIS NI BSNYAD PAR
NUS MA YIN,

		People in the world
		Say things like
		“I see the sky.”

		We have to consider
		The case here

		As the same as how
		You could see the sky—

		For this is the way
		That the Ones Gone Thus

		Describe the seeing
		Of the way things are.

		This seeing
		Could never be described
		By using any other example.


[1665]
ZHES MI MTHONG BA PHUNG PO LNGA DANG, MTHONG BA NI CHOS ZHES GSUNGS LA, DE NI DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON TE, SUS RTEN ‘BREL MTHONG BA DES CHOS MTHONG NGO ZHES GSUNGS PA BZHIN NO,,

What this is saying that we don’t see then is the five parts to a person; whereas what we do see is things—the way things are.  This is a reference to suchness, or the true nature of things.  It’s similar to when they say, “A person who has seen how things are created in dependence has seen the way of things.”


[1666]
DE YANG DPER NA NAM MKHA’ NI THOGS PA’I REG BYA BCAD TZAM YIN LA, DE MTHONG NGAM RTOGS PA NI DGAG BYA SGRIB THOGS YOD NA DMIGS SU RUNG BA LAS MA MTHONG BA LA BYED PA DANG ‘DRA STE, DER YANG MTHONG BA’I NAM MKHA’ DANG MA MTHONG BA NI SGRIB THOGS SO,,

The sky—or space—for example, consists of the simple exclusion of solidity, of tangible objects.  To “see” or to “realize” this space consists of not seeing what would obscure the space if it were present; that is, something solid; and the case here is similar.  That is, in this case, what we see is empty space; and what we don’t see is any solid object which might obstruct that space.


[1667]
DPE DE BZHIN DU MTHONG BA MIN PAR SNGON PO MTHONG BA BZHIN DU DE KHO NA NYID MTHONG BA NI RKANG PA THA MAS BKAG GO

As we see in this example, seeing suchness by not seeing in the same way that would apply in the case of seeing something blue is denied in the final lines above.


[1668]
,MA GZIGS PA’I TSUL GYIS GZIGS PA’I SHES BYED DU BDEN PA GNYIS LA ‘JUG PA LAS, LHA’I BU GAL TE DON DAM PAR NA DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA LUS DANG NGAG DANG, YID KYI YUL GYI RANG BZHIN DU ‘GYUR NA NI DE DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA ZHES BYA BA’I GRANGS SU MI ‘GRO STE, KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA NYID DU ‘GYUR RO,,

In support of this way that we see things by not seeing, we can refer to the Sutra on Entering the Two Realities:

O child of the pleasure beings, if ultimate reality were—in some ultimate way—such that it could act as the object of our actions or words or thoughts, then it could not be counted as what we refer to when we use the phrase, “ultimate reality.”  And that’s because then it would be deceptive reality.


[1669]
‘ON KYANG LHA’I BU DON DAM PAR NA DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA NI THA SNYAD THAMS CAD LAS ‘DAS PA, ,BYE BRAG MED PA{%, Kang} [f. 125b] MA SKYES PA MA ‘GAGS PA, SMRA BAR BYA BA DANG{%, Kang} SMRA BA DANG, SHES PAR BYA BA DANG, SHES PA DANG BRAL BA’O,

What we can say though, o child of the pleasure beings, is that in an ultimate way ultimate reality is beyond all expression; and it it has no particulars.  It never started, and it will never stop.  It is beyond something to say, or saying itself; it is beyond something to know, or knowing itself.


[1670]
ZHES GSUNGS PA DRANGS PA’I MDO SNGA MA’I DON NI, DON DAM PA GZIGS PA’I NGOR DON DAM BDEN PA DE, PHUNG SOGS KUN RDZOB PA MA MTHONG BA’I TSUL GYIS GZIGS PA MIN PAR,

Here is what the first paragraph of sutra citation just listed is saying.  Suppose that, to the state of mind perceiving the ultimate, ultimate reality was not something that we perceived by way of not seeing deceptive objects, such as the parts to a person.


[1671]
PHUNG SOGS LUS KYI DANG NGAG GI SPYOD YUL DANG, YID KYI YUL DU ‘GYUR BA LTAR YUL DU ‘GYUR NA NI, DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PA’I NGOR SPROS PA DANG MA BRAL BAS,

That is, suppose that the ultimate were perceived through the parts of the person and so forth by somehow being the object that our physical actions or verbal speech engaged in; or else the object of our thoughts.  In this case, it would not be true that—to the perceptions of the mind perceiving suchness directly—that state of mind was free of all projections of reality.


[1672]
DON DAM BDEN PAR MI ‘GYUR GYI KUN RDZOB KYI SPROS PAR ‘GYUR RO ZHES PA STE, DE LTAR BYAS NA MA GZIGS PA’I TSUL GYIS GZIGS PA’I SHES BYED DU ‘GRO’O,,

And that would mean that what was perceived could not be ultimate reality; rather, it would be a deceptive projection.  As such, this citation serves as supporting evidence of the idea that we see by means of not seeing.


[1673]
MDO GNYIS PA’I DON NI DON DAM PA MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PA’I NGOR NI, DON DAM BDEN PA BYE BRAG MED PA NI KHYAD PAR MI ‘DRA BA MANG PO MED PA’O,,

And what is the meaning of the second portion of the citation here?  What it’s saying is that—to the perceptions of a state of mind which is perceiving ultimate reality directly—ultimate reality has no particulars; that is, it has no great number of dissimilar features.


[1674]
GZHAN GSUM NI GO SLA’O,,

The remaining three portions of the citation are easily understood.


[1675]
GZIGS NGO DER SMRA BA’I BYA BYED DANG BRAL BA NI SLA’O,,

Saying that undertaking the action of speaking within the perceptions of that state of mind is completely absent is also easily understood.


[1676]
DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PA’I YE SHES DE DON DAM SHES PA DANG, DON DAM BDEN PA DE’I SHES BYAR ‘JOG THUB KYANG, YE SHES DE’I NGOR BYA BYED DE GNYIS DANG BRAL BA MI ‘GAL BA NI,

We can say that the wisdom which directly sees the way things are is perceiving the ultimate; and that what it perceives is ultimate reality.  And yet still it is no contradiction to say that—to the perceptions of this particular state of wisdom—there is a complete absence of the two of the object of an action, and the action itself.


[1677]
BYA BYED GNYIS NI THA SNYAD PA’I BLO KHO NA’I NGOR ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR TE, DPER NA RIGS SHES RJES DPAG YUL CAN DANG, DON DAM BDEN PA YUL DU ‘JOG NUS KYANG, YUL DANG YUL CAN GYI BYA BYED GNYIS RIGS NGOR MA ‘JOG PA BZHIN NO,,

This is due to the fact that the two of an object to an action, and the action itself, can only be established in the perceptions of a nominal state of mind.  We can, for example, say that a perception based on logic possesses an object of deduction; or that ultimate reality could act as its object of perception.  We could not though establish, to the perceptions of such a deduction, objects of action or actions themselves, between the subject and its object.


[1678]
DE NAS LHA’I BU DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA NI RNAM PA THAMS CAD KYI MCHOG DANG LDAN PA{%,} [f. 126a] THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES KYI YUL GYI BAR LAS ‘DAS PA YIN TE, JI LTAR DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA’O ZHES BRJOD PA LTAR NI MA YIN NO,,

“Neither could we then say” something like “o child of the pleasure beings, ultimate reality represents the highest of all the kinds of things; it is far beyond everything up to serving as the object of the wisdom which knows all things…as the reality which is ultimate.”


[1679]
CHOS THAMS CAD NI BRDZUN TE SLU BA’I CHOS SO, ZHES DRANGS PA’I DON NI, YIN TE’I BAR GYIS DON DAM BDEN PA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES KYI YUL LAS ‘DAS PAR BSTAN PA

That is, here then is the meaning of the words, “All existing objects are a lie; they are only things that deceive us.”  Everything up to “they are [beyond]” is meant to say that ultimate reality is beyond being the object of the wisdom which knows all things.


[1680]
DE’I YUL LAS ‘DAS TSUL, JI LTAR NAS MA YIN NO’I BAR GYIS STON TE,

Just how these things are beyond being the object of this wisdom is indicated in the wording of the sentence here that includes “similar to” and “they are not.”


[1681]
JI LTAR ‘DI DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA’O ZHES BRJOD PA NA SGRA DE’I RJES ‘BRANG GI RTOG PA LA, YUL YUL CAN SO SO BA GNYIS SU CHAD PAR SNANG BA LTAR THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA DE LA DE LTAR SNANG BA’I TSUL GYIS DE’I YUL LAS ‘DAS PA STE, GNYIS SNANG GI CHOS THAMS CAD NI BRDZUN PA SLU BA’I CHOS YIN PAS, DE KHO NA NYID KYI MI SLU BA ‘BA’ ZHIG GZIGS PA’I NGOR DE MED CES PA’O,,

What the “similar to” is meant to say here is that—when we utter the expression “ultimate reality”—in our thoughts we get the impression of a separate object & subject, cut off from each other.  One part of the mind which knows all things though—the knowledge of how all things are—is completely beyond any such impression passing through it.  That is, all entities involved with the disparity between what appears to us and how we take it are a lie, and deceive us.  As such, these particular objects cannot exist to the perceptions of a state of mind which is seeing those things which are exclusively undeceiving; which is to say, suchness—the way things really are.


[1682]
DE RNAMS THAMS CAD DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PA’I NGOR PHUNG SOGS KUN RDZOB PA MI SNANG BA’I KHUNGS SO,,

The points we’ve listed from this entire section of scripture then provide an authoritative source for the principle that deceptive objects—such as the parts to a person and so on—can never present themselves to the perceptions of a state of mind in which we are seeing suchness directly.


[1683]
DE’I PHYIR DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PA’I NGOR, DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS PO MED PA LA SOGS PA’I GNYIS CHOS KYI SPROS PA THAMS CAD SRID PA MA YIN TE, SPROS PA DE DAG GI RANG GI NGO BO DER MA DMIGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As such, we can say then that none of the projections of duality—such as that consisting of existing & non-existing objects—can ever possibly present themselves to the perceptions a mind which is perceiving, directly, the way things really are.  And this is because none of these projections can ever exist in some particular way that they are.


[1684]
DE LTAR NA DE KHO NA NYID BSAM PA LA DNGOS SU NA ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS KHO NA TSAD MA YIN GYI, ‘PHAGS PA MA YIN PA NI DNGOS SU TSAD MA MA YIN PAS, GZHAN SKYE ‘PHAGS PA’I DON DAM GYI GZIGS NGOR BKAG PA LA [f. 126b] ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PA MA YIN NO,,

Given all this, we can say that relative to considering the true nature of things, it is only realized beings who can be described as being, in a direct way, accurate.  Those who are not realized beings are not then—in this direct way—accurate.  And as such, disallowing the idea that things starting from things other than themselves could ever present itself to the ultimate perceptions of a realized being is not a concept that could ever be drawn into question by the everyday world.



The world is wrong

[1685]
BZHI PA NI,

This brings us to our fourth point from above: a demonstration that there are contradictions in the idea that our denial of growth from something other is itself contradicted by the perceptions of the world.


	[1686]
	[VI.30]
Lokaḥ pramāṇaṃ yadi tattva darśī
syāl loka evetya paraiḥ kim āryaiḥ,
Kim ārya mārgeṇa bhavec ca kāryaṃ
mūḍhaḥ pramāṇaṃ na hi nāma yuktaḥ.

,GAL TE ‘JIG RTEN TSAD MA YIN NA NI,
,’JIG RTEN DE NYID MTHONG BAS ‘PHAGS GZHAN GYIS,
,CI DGOS ‘PHAGS PA’I LAM GYIS CI ZHIG BYA,
,BLUN PO TSAD MAR RIGS PA’ANG MA YIN NO,,

Suppose that people
Of the world were accurate;

These people of the world then
Would have to see the real nature.

If that were so,
Then there would be no need
For other realized beings.

And what use then
Would be served by
The path of the realized?

Neither do these simple fools
Enjoy any accurate perception
At all.


[VI.31]
Lokaḥ pramāṇaṃ na hi sarvathā tas
tattvādhikāre na ca lokabādhā,
Syāl loka bādhā yadi laukikārtho
loka pratītyaiva nirākriyeta.

[VI.31a]
,RNAM KUN ‘JIG RTEN TSAD MIN DE YI PHYIR,
,DE NYID SKABS SU ‘JIG RTEN GNOD PA MED,

Those of the world
Are not, in any way,
An accurate perception.

For this reason,
The world cannot draw
Anything into question,

With regard to
The way things are.


[1687]
CI STE GZHAN SKYE DON DAM PAR BKAG PA LA ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA BRJOD PAR ‘DOD PAS,

Now some people have come up with objections that they think will show that the parlance of the everyday world works against our denial that things could grow from things that are other than them, in an ultimate way.


[1688]
DE KHO NA NYID RNAM PAR DPYOD PA’I SKABS SU DE KHO NA NYID LA ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA YANG TSAD MAR KHAS LEN NA DE LTA YIN DANG

They would also accept that—at a point where we are examining the idea of suchness—the way that people of the world see the way things really are is accurate.


[1689]
GAL TE ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA DE KHO NA NYID LA TSAD MA YIN NA NI, ‘JIG RTEN RANG DGA’ BAS DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA STE RTOGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, DE YANG ‘KHOR BA THOG MA MED PA NAS YIN PAS,

Suppose then, in such a case, that the way people of the world see the idea of suchness is something which is accurate.  In that case, people of the world just in their everyday mode would have to see this real nature of things directly; which is to say, they would have to realize it.  Further, that would have to have been the case for time with no beginning.


[1690]
MA RIG PA SPANGS PAR KHAS BLANG DGOS PAS DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA LA ‘PHAGS PA GZHAN GYIS CI ZHIG DGOS TE MI DGOS LA, ‘PHAGS PA’I LAM TSOL BA YIS KYANG CI ZHIG BYA STE DGOS PA MED DO,,

And if that were so, then we would have to say that they had already eliminated misunderstanding within themselves.  And in that case, we would have to question why other realized beings would ever have to get involved with trying to realize suchness at all—for indeed there would be no need.  And what use then would be served by the pursuit of the path of the realized ones either?  There would be no need for it.


[1691]
‘JIG RTEN RANG DGA’ BA’I BLUN PO NI, DE KHO NA NYID LA TSAD MAR RIGS PA’ANG MA YIN NO,,

Neither then is it the case that people of the world just in their everyday mode—these simple fools—enjoy any accurate perception of the way things really are, at all.


[1692]
DE’I PHYIR DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I SKABS SU DE KHO NA NYID LA RNAM PA KUN TE THAMS CAD DU ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA TSAD MA MIN PA DE YI PHYIR, DE KHO NA NYID KYI SKABS SU ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA MED DO,,

And so we can say that—at that point where we are examining the way things really are—the way that those of the world see suchness is something which is not, in any way at all, an accurate perception.  For this reason then, the way of the world cannot draw anything into question, with regard to the way things really are.


[1693]
RNAM KUN ‘JIG RTEN TSAD MIN ZHES PAS LUGS ‘DIS TSAD MA GTAN MI ‘DOD PAR STON PAS, LUGS DE YANG DAG PA MA YIN NO ZHES SMRA BA DANG,

Some people say that the words of the root text here—“those of the world do not, in any way, have an accurate perception”—indicate that, in the current system, no form of accurate perception at all is accepted; and then they go on to say that, therefore, this is not a correct system at all.


[1694]
KHA CIG LUGS DE LEGS SO ZHES SMRA BA GNYIS KAS KYANG SLOB DPON ‘DI’I BZHED PA MA RTOGS BZHIN DU SMRAS PAS,

Still others applaud the opinion that there is no accurate perception.  But both of these positions are expressed through a total failure to grasp what our master here actually believes.


[1695]
RANG GI DE NYID STON PA TZAM DU ZAD DE, ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA DE KHO NA NYID LA RNAM PA KUN TU TSAD MA MIN PAR BSTAN PA LA, SPYIR TSAD [f. 127a] MA MI BZHED PAR GO ‘DUG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What these debaters are actually demonstrating is nothing more than their own version of the way things really are.  Because they have taken lines that were meant to express how people of the world view the way things really are in a way which is not accurate at all; and understood this as a blanket denial of accurate perception itself.


[1696]
TSAD MA DANG GZHAL BYA YANG TSIG GSAL LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA BKAG NAS, LTOS ‘JOG GI TSAD MA DANG GZHAL BYA ‘JOG PAR BSHAD PA LTA BUR BYED DGOS TE ‘OG TU ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As for the concepts of accurate perception and the objects under its consideration, we need to deny—in the same way as we seen this done in A Clarification of the Verses—that they could ever exist through any nature of their own.  And then we need to go further and do things like explaining how it is that we ourselves posit an accurate type of perception which could establish that things exist in reliance; and what the object under its consideration would be like.



The world
contradicts the world

[1697]
LNGA PA NI,

Here then is our fifth point from above—where we present how the perceptions of the world would in fact be contradicted themselves.


	[1698]
[VI.31b]
,’JIG RTEN DON NI ‘JIG RTEN GRAGS NYID KYIS,
,GAL TE SEL NA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD ‘GYUR,

Suppose that
The state of things
In the everyday world

Were itself disallowed
By the very conventions
Of this same world;

This same person
Would be contradicted
By the world.


[1699]
‘O NA JI LTAR ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,

“Well then,” one may begin.  “Just how is it that those ideas are contradicted by the world itself?”


[1700]
‘JIG RTEN NYID LAS GRAGS SHING GRUB PA’I DON NI, ‘JIG RTEN GYI GRAGS PA NYID KYIS GAL TE SEL NA, GANG ZAG DE LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Consider, in reply, the state of things as this is generally considered, and established, in the everyday world itself.  Suppose this were itself disallowed by the very conventions of this same world; in this case, we could say that this same person was contradicted by the world.


[1701]
DE NI DPER NA KHA CIG GIS NGA’I RDZAS PHROGS SO ZHES SMRAS PA DANG, GANG ZAG GZHAN CIG GIS DE LA DRIS PA RDZAS DE CI ZHIG YIN,

Suppose, for example, that someone comes up to somebody else and says, “Some people stole my things.”  And then the other person there asks, “Well what things, exactly, were taken?”


[1702]
DES BUM PA’O ZHES SMRAS PA LA, GZHAN DES BUM PA NI RDZAS MA YIN TE, GZHAL BYA YIN PA’I PHYIR RMI LAM GYI BUM PA BZHIN NO, ZHES SUN ‘BYIN PA

And the person says, “They took a water pitcher.”  And then their friend overthrows that whole assertion with, “But a water pitcher is not a thing; after all, it’s not something you could ever have under consideration.  It’s just the same as a water pitcher in a dream.”


[1703]
DE LTA BU LA SOGS PA’I YUL LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD KYI, GANG GI TSE ‘PHAGS PA’I DON DAM GYI GZIGS PA LA BRTEN TE, SKYE BO DON DAM LA MKHAS PA TSAD MAR BYAS NAS DE KHO NA NYID GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA DE’I TSE, ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

It is true that the perceptions of the everyday world could work to deny this sort of object; but suppose instead that we consider the case relative to the vision of ultimate reality possessed by a realized being.  Taking a person who has mastered the ultimate as someone who is accurate, then in a case where we seek to establish just what the real nature of things is, we cannot say that there is any contradiction with what the world says is so.


[1704]
MKHAS PAS PHYOGS ‘DIS GZHAN YANG DPYAD PAR BYA’O ZHES GSUNGS PA NI, NGA NI BUM PA’I BDAG PO DANG LHAS BYIN NI ‘PHROG MKHAN MA YIN TE, ZHES PA DANG, NGA’I ZHING STENG DU SKYES SO BYAS PA NA CI ZHIG SKYES ZHES ‘DRI BA LA

We see then the statement, “The wise should apply this position as well to their examination of other cases.”  That is, suppose we say “I am the owner of this pitcher,” and “John over there is the one who stole it.”  Or suppose we say “I grew that in my field,” and somebody asks us, “What is it that you grew?”


[1705]
MYU GU’O ZHES BYAS PA NA, MYU GU NI SKYE BA MED DE GZHAL BYA YIN PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA DANG, RMI LAM GYI GANG ZAG [f. 127b] DANG MYU GU BZHIN ZHES SMRA BA DA LTA DBU MA’I RIGS PA CHEN POR ‘DOD PA RNAMS LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PAR BSTAN NO,,

And then we reply to them, “It was a sprout of a plant.”  And they answer, “Hey, sprouts are not something that ever grows.  And that’s because they are something you can consider, in your mind.”  And: “They are just like a person that you meet in a dream, or a sprout in a dream.”  Which is to say, just normal people of the world can overthrow those nowadays who claim to utilize magnificent reasoning of the middle way.



Overcoming objections about what
the everyday world believes

[1706]
GNYIS PA NI,

Next is our second section from above: overcoming objections relating to the everyday world which say that there is no growth of things from something other than themselves, even in the parlance of the world.


	[1707]
[VI.32]
Uptvāpi lokaḥ khalu bīja mātraṃ
bravīti putro janito mayaiṣaḥ,
Uptas taruś ceti paraiti yasmāj
janmān yatas tena na lokato’pi.

,GANG PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN SA BON TZAM BTAB NAS,
,BDAG GIS BU ‘DI SKYED CES SMRA BYED CING,
,SHING YANG BTZUGS SO SNYAM DU RTOG DES NA,
,GZHAN LAS SKYE BA ‘JIG RTEN LAS KYANG MED,

		Because the world
		Makes the declaration,

		“I was the one who
		Gave birth to this child,”

		And people think
		To themselves,
		“I planted the tree,”
		
		Things growing from things
That are other than them

Is not something that we see
Even in the everyday world.


[1708]
DE LTAR ‘JIG RTEN GYI GRAGS PA’I NGOR GZHAN SKYE KHAS BLANGS NAS KYANG ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA SPANGS TE, DA NI ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA LA YANG GZHAN SKYE MED PAS ‘JIG RTEN GYI LTA BA LA GNAS NAS KYANG GZHAN SKYE DGAG PAR ‘DOD PA LA ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA MED DO, ZHES BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

As such, we can say that—since the idea that things grow from other things is accepted even in the normal parlance of the world—any argument against this idea by that world is prevented.  What comes next here is an explanation which says, “But now let’s look here, at how even in the view of the world at large, the idea that one thing could grow from another thing is denied; and how, as such, even if we adhere to the views of the world, we then agree that the idea that one thing could grow from another is mistaken—and that there is no position of the world at large that could prevent this view.”  This is the idea that we seek to present in these next lines of the root text.


[1709]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN PA RNAMS PHO’I DBANG PO CAN ‘GA’ ZHIG STON PA NA, BU ‘DI BDAG GIS BSKYED CES SMRA BAR BYED LA, DE LTAR BYED KYANG PHA ‘DIS PHO’I DBANG PO CAN ZHIG RANG GI LUS LAS BTON NAS, BU DE’I MA’I KHONG DU ‘JUG PA NI MA YIN NO,,

The reason all this is true is because there are people of the world—some number of them, who possess the sexual organ of a male—who might make a declaration where they say, “I was the one who gave birth to this child.”  Despite them saying so, it is not the case though that the father was involved in such a way that the child issued forth from the body of a person possessing a male organ, and then entered into the cavity of its mother.


[1710]
‘O NA CI ZHE NA, BU DE’I LUS KYI SA BON DU GYUR PA’I MI GTZANG BA TZAM ZHIG MA DE’I MNGAL DU BTAB PA STE LDUGS PA’O,,

“Well then,” you might ask, “what was, rather, the case here?”  What happened was that the filth which constituted the seed for the body of the child was deposited into the womb of the mother: sprinkled around in there.


[1711]
GANG GI PHYIR PHA ‘DI BU DE’I LUS KYI RGYU BLUGS NAS RANG GI BU STON PAR BYED PA DE’I PHYIR, SA BON DANG BU GNYIS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN DU ‘DZIN PA MA YIN NO, ZHES BYA BAR ‘JIG RTEN DU GSAL BAR NGES SO,,

And so the father points to the child as his child, since it was he who deposited the cause for the child’s body.  As such, it is beyond question that—in the world—the case is clear: neither of the two, the seed nor the child, is being considered something other which exists in & of itself.


[1712]
DE’I PHYIR SA BON GYI MI GTZANG BA DANG BU GNYIS DANG, NAS KYI SA BON DANG MYU GU GNYIS LA SOGS PA LA GZHAN LAS SKYE BAR ‘DZIN PA ‘JIG RTEN LAS KYANG MED DO,,

As such, holding the view that the two—the impure substance of the seed, and the child; or other things like the pair of the seed for a sprout, and the sprout itself—grow from something other than themselves is not something that even the world accepts.


[1713]
GAL TE RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN DU ‘DZIN NA NI, GANG ZAG GZHAN LTAR BU DE BSTAN NAS ‘DI NGAS BSKYED DO ZHES STON PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

If the world did adhere to something other which did exist in & of itself, then it would never happen that—as we saw with that other person—people pointed to a child and said “I was the one who gave them birth.”  


[1714]
DE BZHIN DU SHING [f. 128a] SDONG PO’I SA BON TZAM BTAB NAS DE LAS SHING SDONG SKYES PA NA, SHING SDONG ‘DI NGAS BTZUGS SO SNYAM DU RTOG PA DES NA, ‘JIG RTEN GYI NGOR GZHAN SKYE MED PA SOGS SNGA MA BZHIN DU SBYAR RO,,

The case is the same, when someone plants a simple seed for a tree, and a trunk does indeed grow from that.  That is, people think to themselves, “I was the one who planted the tree with this trunk”; and this is why—as we did with the previous case—we can say things like “There is no instance where, in the perceptions of the world, one thing can grow from another thing.”


[1715]
BTAB PA’I SA BON GNYIS SHING SDONG DANG BU MA YIN KYANG, DE GNYIS BTAB PA LA BRTEN NAS SHING SDONG DANG BU SKYES PA NA, DE GNYIS BSTAN NAS ‘DI BDAG GIS BSKYED CES ‘JOG NUS TE, NA BA DANG SOS PA’I LAG PA GANG ZAG DE MA YIN KYANG, LAG PA NA BA DANG SOS PAS GANG ZAG DE NA BA DANG SOS PAR ‘JOG NUS PA BZHIN NO,,

The two seeds that were planted are neither the trunk of the tree, nor the child; but due to the planting of the two, the trunk and the child grow.  Once you have pointed to the two, you are able to establish the fact that “I gave birth to this.”  A hand that is ailing, or which has healed, is not the person who has the hand; but we are able to establish that a person is either ailing, or healed, through either the ailing or recovery of the hand itself.


[1716]
DE LTAR ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD LA GZHAN SKYE MED KYANG, GZHAN SKYE YOD PA ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BAS ‘GOG NUS PA MIN TE, RGYU ‘BRAS RANG BZHIN GYIS NGO BO THA DAD PA ‘GOG PA NI DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PA LA NGES PAR LTOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Thus we can say that—even though in the parlance of the world they may not talk about the fact that things have to grow from other things—there is nothing in the way that the world sees things that could succeed in disproving it.  And this is because—when we deny that causes and effects could be separate through any nature of their own—we definitely need to rely upon reasoning which is analyzing the way things really are.
 

[1717]
DE’I PHYIR GRUB MTHA’ SMRA BA GZHAN GYIS GZHAN SKYE KHAS BLANGS PA’I DON NI, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN SKYE YIN GYI, NGO BO GZHAN DU GRUB PA TZAM MA YIN LA, DE TZAM ‘JIG RTEN GYI NGOR MA GRUB PA YANG MIN NO,,

As such, when those who profess other schools of thought say that they accept the idea that things grow from other things, what they are referring to actually is a growing from other things which could exist by definition.  It is not simply the fact that the essence of the things is that they exist as other than each other; just that much is not something that cannot be established to the perceptions of the everyday world.


[1718]
GZHAN LAS SKYE BA ‘JIG RTEN LAS KYANG MED, CES PA’I DON NI, ‘JIG RTEN RANG DGA’ BAS SA MYUG LA SOGS PA’I NYER LEN GYI RGYU ‘BRAS LA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN DU ‘DZIN PA MED CES PA TZAM MIN GYI,

But then our verse here says, “Things growing from things that are other than them is not something that we see even in the everyday world.”  This is not simply saying that just normal people of the everyday world never hold that things like the soil and the sprout—examples of cause & effect where the cause turns into the result directly—exist as entities that are other than each other by definition.


[1719]
THA SNYAD DU YANG GZHAN SKYE MED PAR STON PAR YANG SHES PAR BYA STE, GNYI GA LAS SKYE BA ‘GOG PA’I ‘GREL PAR YANG, DE LA JI LTAR GONG DU BDAG [f. 128b] DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PAR YANG MI RIGS SO ZHES BSTAN PA DE BZHIN DU TSIG GAL GNYIS SU SMRA BA LA YANG JI SKAD DU BSHAD PA’I RIGS PAS MI SRID DO, ZHES THA SNYAD DU YANG GZHAN SKYE MED PA GSAL BAR GSUNGS PA DANG,

Rather, it is saying that we are to understand, further, that there is no growing of one thing from another here even in a nominal sense.  The growing of things from either here is denied in the autocommentary as well, in the words—

On this point, we have above demonstrated that the growing of things both from themselves and from something other than themselves is illogical for the everyday world, from both the deceptive and the ultimate points of view.  In the same vein, we see prior to this point, in the root text, two mentions of the wording starting with “suppose”—which is meant to indicate that it would be impossible to establish either option with the indicated reasoning.

What this is saying, very clearly, is that there is no concept of things growing from something other than themselves here, even nominally.


[1720]
TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG, GAL TE BDAG DANG GZHAN DANG GNYI GA DANG RGYU MED PA LAS DNGOS PO RNAMS SKYE BA YOD PA MA YIN NA, JI LTAR BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS MA RIG PA’I RKYEN GYIS ‘DU BYED RNAMS ZHES GSUNGS,

A Clarification of the Verses also says—

If there is no such thing as things growing from either themselves, or from something other than themselves, or from both, or from no cause at all, then how is it that the Conquering Buddha himself made the statement that “Fresh karma springs from the factor of misunderstanding”?


[1721]
ZHES PA’I LAN DU, BSHAD PAR BYA STE, ‘DI NI KUN RDZOB YIN GYI DE KHO NA NYID NI MA YIN NO, ZHES MA RIG PAS ‘DU BYED SKYED PA SOGS NI KUN RDZOB TU YIN GYI DON DAM PAR MA YIN PAR GSUNGS SO,,

And then the same text answers itself:

I will explain this to you, by saying “This refers to the deceptive; it is not, however, referring to the way things really are.”  And what this is saying is that—when fresh karma is triggered by misunderstanding—it’s all happening in a deceptive manner, and not in an ultimate way.


[1722]
CI KUN RDZOB KYI RNAM PAR GZHAG PA BRJOD PAR BYA BA YIN NAM ZHES PA’I LAN DU, RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM GYIS KUN RDZOB GRUB PAR KHAS LEN GYI, PHYOGS BZHI KHAS BLANGS PA’I SGO NAS NI MA YIN TE,

And the same work concludes with:

And you may ask, “What do you mean, when you say this is all happening in a deceptive way?”  In response we can say that we accept that something exists in a deceptive way as soon as we mention no more than “this particular factor.”  It is not though because we are accepting any one of the four options at this point.


[1723]
ZHES KUN RDZOB TU RKYEN ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS ‘DI ‘BYUNG GI SKYE BA KHAS LEN PA LA YANG, PHYOGS BZHI’I SKYE BA KHAS MI LEN PA GSAL BAR GSUNGS PAS, LUGS ‘DI LA GZHAN SKYE KUN RDZOB TU MI ‘GOG CES PA NI, LUGS ‘DI LEGS PAR MA RTOGS PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

What this is saying is that we do accept a growing where—in a deceptive sense—"this particular thing has occurred due to that particular factor.”  But it goes on to state, quite clearly, that we do not accept a growing that could occur through any of the four classical options here.  Some people have said that—therefore–the present system does not deny that things could grow from other things, in a deceptive manner; but this statement reflects an inability to understand the present system clearly.



Things growing from other,
in the everyday world

[1724]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third part from above: demonstrating the advantages of denying that the idea that things could grow from something other than themselves in any way contradicts the beliefs of the everyday world.


	[1725]
[VI.33]
Yato na bījāt paratāṅkurasya
satyaṅkure bījam ato na naṣṭam,
Eko yato nāsti tato’pi bījaṃ
satyaṅkure’stīti na vācyam eva.

	,GANG PHYIR MYU GU SA BON LAS GZHAN MIN,
,DE PHYIR MYUG TSE SA BON ZHIG PA MED,
,GANG PHYIR GCIG NYID YOD MIN DE PHYIR YANG,
,MYUG TSE SA BON YOD CES BRJOD MI BYA,

And for what reason?
A sprout is not something
Which exists as something
Other than the seed;

Therefore, by the time
Of the sprout, the seed
Has gone out of existence;
That no longer exists.

For the reason that
They are not such
That they exist
As one single thing,

Because it’s not,
We never speak of a seed
Which is present,
By the time of the sprout.


[1726]
DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I TSUL LA, RTEN ‘BYUNG RTAG CHAD MED PAR GRUB PA’I SGO NAS RTAG CHAD KYI MTHAR MI LTUNG BA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA, 

For all these reasons, then, we have established that the way in which things occur in dependence is free of the extremes of lasting forever or simply discontinuing, in the way we have explained how things are free of existing through any nature of their own.  And then now we seek to demonstrate the benefits of avoiding, thus, falling into these extremes of things lasting forever, or discontinuing; which is why we continue on here to explain the following point.


[1727]
GAL TE MYU GU SA BON LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I [f. 129a] GZHAN YIN NA NI, SA MYUG GNYIS RGYU ‘BRAS SU MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR,

That is, if a sprout were something other than its seed in a way where the sprout existed through some nature of its own, it would be inappropriate to say that the seed and the sprout were a cause and its effect.


[1728]
THE TSOM MED PAR MYU GU YOD BZHIN DU YANG SA BON RGYUN CHAD PAR ‘GYUR TE, DE LA NI SA MYUG ‘BREL MED DU SONG NAS, MYU GU YOD KYANG SA BON GYI RIGS BRGYUD MA CHAD PA LA MI PHAN PA’I PHYIR TE,

And for that reason—beyond any shadow of a doubt—at any point where the sprout is already in existence, the flow of the seed must already have discontinued.  And at that point as well, the seed and the sprout must have lost any connection between them.  As such, even if the sprout is present, it doesn’t at all assist in the continued existence of the seed as a particular type of thing.


[1729]
DPER NA BA MEN YOD PAS BA LANG SHI NAS RIGS BRGYUD CHAD PA MIN PA LA MI PHAN PA DANG, SO SKYE YOD PAS ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS KYIS RANG NYID KYI SRID PAR ‘KHOR BA RGYUN BCAD PA MIN PA LA MI PHAN PA BZHIN NO,,

For example, just because we have an ox standing there, it doesn’t at all help prevent the fact that a particular cow has discontinued as that type of thing, once the cow dies.  And just because you have a common being standing there, it doesn’t help prevent the fact that particular realized beings have managed to cut off the flow of their own personal circling within the world of pain.


[1730]
DE LTAR YIN PA LA RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR MYU GU SA BON LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN MIN PA’I PHYOGS LA, DE GNYIS RGYU ‘BRAS SU MI ‘GAL BA DE’I PHYIR MYU GU YOD PA’I TSE SA BON ZHIG PA STE DE’I RIGS BRGYUD CHAD PA MED PAS CHAD PA SPANGS SO,,

Why—for what reason—is this the case?  Suppose we take the position that a sprout is not something which exists as something other than the seed—at least as something which is other through some nature of its own.  The fact is that it is no contradiction to say that these two exist as cause & effect; which means that, therefore, we can say that by the time that the sprout is in existence, the seed has gone out of existence.  It’s not though that the the seed type in itself has undergone any discontinuation here; that it no longer exists.  As such, we avoid the extreme of saying that things have stopped altogether.


[1731]
MYU GU’I DUS SU SA BON ‘GAGS PA LAN MANG DU BSHAD PAS, SA BON ZHIG PA’I DON ‘GREL BAS SA BON RGYUN CHAD PA LA BSHAD CING, SA BON MI ‘JIG PA BKAG PAR GSUNGS PAS, SA BON GYI RGYUN CHAD PA ZHES PA DE’I RIGS BRGYUD CHAD PA LA BZHED DO,,

The fact that—by the time of the sprout—the seed has come to a stop is described repeatedly; and so the autocommentary undertakes to explain what we mean when we say that the seed has ended, as saying that it is the discontinuation of the flow of the seed.  It speaks of a seed which has not ended being stopped; as such, the position being taken is that the expression “discontinuation of the flow of the seed” refers to the discontinuation of the continued existence of the seed as a particular type of thing.


[1732]
GANG GI PHYIR SA MYUG GNYIS GCIG NYID DU YOD PA MIN PAS SA BON DE NYID MYU GUR ‘PHOS PA MIN PA’I PHYIR, MYU GU’I DUS NA SA BON MI ‘JIG PA BKAG PA DE’I PHYIR YANG, MYU GU’I TSE SA BON YOD CES BRJOD PAR MI BYA BAS RTAG PAR YANG BKAG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

For the reason that the pair of the seed and sprout are not such that they exist as one single thing, it is not the seed itself which shifts into being the sprout.  That’s because we’ve already denied the idea that—by the time that the sprout is present—the seed could not have gone out of existence.  And for this reason too we never speak of a seed which is present, by the time of the sprout.  Thus we avoid as well the extreme of saying that things would remain the same forever.


[1733]
DE LTAR BSHAD PA NI RGYA CHER ROL PA LAS,
,SA BON YOD NA MYU GU JI BZHIN TE,
,SA BON GANG YIN MYU GU [f. 129b] DE NYID MIN,
,DE LAS GZHAN MIN DE YANG MA YIN TE,
,DE LTAR RTAG MIN CHAD MIN CHOS NYID DO,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NO,,

Explaining things this way is what sutra called Playing Everywhere means when it says,

	How could there be a sprout
	When a seed is there?
	Whatever a seed is,
	Is not what that sprout is.
	
	But neither is it
	Something other than it;
	Thus it is that the
	Very nature of things
	
	Is not that they stay forever,
	Or that they have somehow
	Stopped.


[1734]
DE DAG GI DON NI SA BON YOD PAR GYUR NA SA BON GYI RGYU CAN MYU GU YANG JI LTA BA BZHIN DU ‘BYUNG NGO,,

What these lines are saying is that—if a seed exists—then a sprout which possesses this seed as its cause can also, correctly, occur.


[1735]
DE ‘BYUNG BA NA SA BON LAS GZHAN NYID DU STE NAS ‘BYUNG BA MI RUNG BAS, SA MYUG GNYIS NGO BO GCIG GO SNYAM NA,

And if the sprout does occur, then it would be incorrect to say that it could have occurred in any other way except from its cause.  And suppose that, because of this fact, you think to yourself that seed and the sprout must be such that to be one is to be the other.


[1736]
MYU GU SA BON LAS GZHAN NAS ‘BYUNG BA MIN KYANG SA BON DE NYID MYU GUR ‘PHOS PA MIN NO,,

The sprout does not occur through anything other than the seed; but that doesn’t mean that what’s happening is that the same seed is shifting into the sprout.


[1737]
DE’I RGYU MTSAN CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, MYU GU DE SA BON LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN DANG, RANG BZHIN GCIG PA NYID DE YANG MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And why is that?  Because the sprout is not something that exists through some nature of its own which is other than the seed; nor is it something which is such that to be it is to be no other than the seed.


[1738]
DE ‘DRA BA’I PHYOGS GNYIS CAR YANG BKAG PA NA MYU GU’I RANG BZHIN DE RTAG CHAD DANG BRAL BA’I CHOS NYID DU GSAL BAR BYAS SO,,

If we disprove that the sprout could ever fit either of these two possibilities, then we have made perfectly clear that the nature of this sprout is an actual nature of things where they are free of either staying the same forever, or simply blinking out of existence.


[1739]
DON ‘DI NYID MDO DE NYID LAS,
,’DU BYED RNAMS NI MA RIG RKYEN CAN TE,
,’DU BYED DE DAG DE NYID DU YOD MIN,
,’DU BYED MA RIG ‘DI GNYIS STONG PA STE,
,RANG BZHIN GYIS NI G-YO BA DANG BRAL BA,
ZHES BYA BAS BSHAD DE,

This point is clarified in the same sutra, in the following words—

Incidents of fresh karma
Are things that have
Misunderstanding as their cause;

These cases of fresh karma
Are not something that exist
In and of themselves.

Fresh karmas and misunderstanding,
These two, are empty;

They are free of any shifting
Through any nature of their own.


[1740]
RKANG PA DANG POS NI ‘DU BYED MA RIG PA LA BRTEN NAS ‘BYUNG BA’I GTAN TSIGS DANG, GNYIS PAS NI ‘DU BYED DE KHO NA NYID DU YOD PA MIN ZHES PA’I BSGRUB BYA DANG, GSUM PAS NI RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS KA STONG PAR BSTAN LA, BZHI PAS NI STONG TSUL STON TE, G-YO BA NI MNGON PAR ‘DU BYED PA YIN LA, DE DANG BRAL BA NI ‘DU BYED ‘DU BYED KYIS STONG PA’O,,

The first of the four sections here presents the logical statement, that fresh karma occurs through its dependence upon misunderstanding.  The second of the four presents the assertion to be proven, which is that fresh karma is not something which could exist in & of itself.  The third presents the idea that both cause and effect are empty; and then the fourth section describes the way in which they are empty.  Here, the word “shifting” connotes occurrence through conscious undertaking; and mentioning “free of” is meant to indicate that fresh karma is empty of any such undertaking.


[1741]
DE YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DANG BRAL LO ZHES DGAG BYA’I KHYAD PAR BSTAN TE, DE KHO NA NYID DU MED PA DANG DON ‘DRA’O,,

And then when it’s saying here that “things are devoid of existing through any nature of their own”—which is to indicate the logical feature of what it is we deny.  This is similar to saying that these things are devoid of existing in & of themselves.


[1742]
[f. 130a] MDO DE’I DON BSTAN BCOS RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,GANG LA BRTEN TE GANG ‘BYUNG BA,
,DE NI RE ZHIG DE NYID MIN,
,DE LAS GZHAN PA’ANG MA YIN PA,
,DE PHYIR RTAG MIN CHAD MA YIN,
,ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The point of these sutra citations is also covered in Wisdom:

Once something occurs
Through relying on anything else,

We cannot at that point say
It exists in & of itself.

But neither is it
Something other than that;

And that’s why we can say
That things neither last forever,
Nor do they simply discontinue.



A seeing emptiness
that destroyed things

[1743]
BZHI PA LA GNYIS, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA YOD PAR ‘DOD PA DGAG PA DANG, DE LTAR BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O,,

Here then is our fourth point from above, demonstrating that there is no possible instance where it would be correct to say that things could grow through any nature of their own.  Here we proceed in two steps: denying the belief that things could exist by definition; and then disproving any argument against this denial.


[1744]
DANG PO LA GSUM, ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG DNGOS PO’I ‘JIG RGYUR THAL BAS DGAG ,THA SNYAD BDEN PA RIGS PAS DPYAD BZOD DU THAL BAS DGAG ,DON DAM PA’I SKYE BA MI KHEGS PAR THAL BAS DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first step here has three parts of its own.  We will first make our denial by showing that the deep meditation of a realized being would then have to act as a cause for the destruction of the entity.  Secondly we will make the denial by demonstrating that it would have to be the case that nominal reality could stand up under logical analysis.  And then thirdly we’ll make the same denial by showing that, in the same case, we could never deny that things started in any ultimate way.  And so here is the first of those three points.


	[1745]
[VI.34]
Svalakṣaṇaṃ ced bhavati pratītya
tasyāpavāde sati bhāvanāśāt,
Syāc chūnyatā bhava vināśa hetur
yuktaṃ na caitan na tato’sti bhāvaḥ.

,GAL TE RANG GI MTSAN NYID BRTEN ‘GYUR NA,
,DE LA SKUR BAS DNGOS PO ‘JIG PA’I PHYIR,
,STONG NYID DNGOS PO ‘JIG PA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR NA,
,DE NI RIGS MIN DE PHYIR DNGOS YOD MIN,

Suppose they existed
By definition; if that
Were something depending,
In a manner discounting these,

Entities would have to be
Destroyed; and as such,

Emptiness must act
As a cause
For the destruction
Of the entities.

Yet neither is that
Reasonable; as such,

It could never occur
That objects could exist.


[1746]
JI LTAR RANG BZHIN GYIS CHOS ‘GA’ YANG SKYE BA MED DO ZHES BYA BA ‘DI NI GDON MI ZA BAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA DGOS SO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR DON ‘DI NGES PAR KHAS BLANG DGOS ZHES SMRA BAR RIGS KYI, ‘DI LA KHAS LEN GZHAG TU MI RUNG NGO ZHES BZLOG STE SMRA BAR MI BYA’O,,

As they say, “We must, beyond any shadow of a doubt, accept the idea that ‘There is no starting of any entity at all by means of any nature of its own’.”  That is, it would be appropriate at this point to follow this advice and say, “This is an idea that we must indeed agree to.”  Which is to say, it would be inappropriate to say the opposite: “We don’t see any way that this could be considered something we should agree to.”


[1747]
DE LTA MA YIN TE GAL TE GZUGS DANG TSOR BA LA SOGS PA’I RANG GI MTSAN NYID DE RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I RANG BZHIN, RGYU DANG RKYEN LA BRTEN NAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR NA NI, RNAL ‘BYOR PAS CHOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PAR MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA’I TSE, DNGOS PO’I RANG BZHIN DE LA SKUR PA BTAB PA’I TSUL GYIS STONG PA NYID RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR TE,

And that is indeed the case, since—well, suppose it were not.  Suppose that physical form and feelings and the rest had a nature of existing by definition; which is to say, through some nature of their own.  If that nature were something that started by depending upon causes & conditions, then when a deep practitioner perceived, directly, that entities were empty of existing through any nature of their own, then they would be perceiving emptiness itself in a manner where they were discounting the very nature of all these entities.


[1748]
MNYAM GZHAG GIS GZUGS SOGS RNAMS MA DMIGS PA DGOS LA, DE RNAMS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB NA MNYAM GZHAG GIS DMIGS DGOS PA LAS MA [f. 130b] DMIGS PA’I PHYIR, DE’I TSE DNGOS PO DE RNAMS MED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And the simple fact is that—when we are in this particular deep meditation—we would then have to be focusing upon physical form and the like; and if these things existed by definition, then the meditation would have to be perceiving that fact.  But in fact, it does not.  And for this reason then, those entities—at that moment in time—would have to be non-existent.


[1749]
DE MED NA NI DNGOS PO DE RNAMS MNYAM GZHAG GI SNGAR YOD PA PHYIS MED PA’I ‘JIG PA STE ZHIG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And if they were in fact non-existent, then entities which were existent previous to the meditation would have to be absent after the meditation: there would have had to be some kind of destruction, where they ended.


[1750]
DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR ‘JIG PA LA MNYAM GZHAG NYID RGYUR ‘GRO DGOS PAS, THO BA LA SOGS PA BUM PA LA SOGS PA’I ‘JIG RGYU YIN PA DE BZHIN DU, STONG PA NYID MTHONG BA YANG DNGOS PO’I RANG BZHIN ‘JIG PA DANG DE LA SKUR BA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG NA,

As such, the case where they end in such a way must be one where the deep meditation itself has acted as the cause; which means that it must be similar to the way in which a hammer or the like acts as a cause for the destruction of a clay water pitcher, or something of that ilk.  Which is to say, seeing the fact of emptiness must in turn act as a cause for the destruction of the nature of the entities involved; for discounting them.


[1751]
DE NI RIGS PA YANG MIN PA DE’I PHYIR DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA NI YOD PA MIN PAS, DUS THAMS CAD KYI TSE RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA KHAS BLANG BAR MI BYA’O,,

And yet neither is that a reasonable thing to say happened; as such, it could never occur that objects could exist by definition.  And thus we could never accept that things had started through any nature of their own, at any particular point in time at all.


[1752]
‘DI LA DBU MA PA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I SKYE BA KHAS LEN PA RNAMS, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB KYANG BDEN GRUB TU MI ‘GRO BAR ‘DOD PA’I RGYU MTSAN GYIS, GZUGS SOGS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB NA DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PAS DMIGS MI DGOS SO, ZHES SMRA MOD KYANG,

Now there are certain members of the Middle Way school who accept the idea that the starting of things could exist by definition; and they would say that a thing’s existing by definition does not necessitate that it exists in truth.  And then for this reason they would say that it’s not necessarily the case that—if physical form and the rest exist by definition—then that would have to be perceived by someone who was seeing, directly, the way things really are.


[1753]
DE TZAM NAS BDEN GRUB YIN PAR SNGAR YANG BSHAD CING, SLAR YANG ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA’I RIGS PAS NYES PA SPONG MI NUS SO,,

From this standpoint alone they would have to be accepting, as we explained earlier, that things existed in truth; and it’s not as though we would be able to disabuse them of their mistake by repeated any further logic.


[1754]
‘DIR ‘GREL PA LAS, DKON BRTZEGS LAS ‘OD SRUNGS GZHAN YANG DBU MA’I LAM CHOS RNAMS LA YANG DAG PAR SO SOR RTOG PA NI, GANG STONG PA NYID KYIS CHOS RNAMS STONG PAR MI BYED DE, CHOS RNAMS NYID STONG PA NYID DANG, ZHES GSUNGS SHING,

On this point, the autocommentary says—

We see, in the Pile of Jewels, “O Kashyapa, we can say moreover that—when we use the path of the middle way to comprehend entities so thoroughly—it’s not as if the fact of emptiness is making those things empty: rather, the very nature of those things is their very emptiness; and…”


[1755]
MTSAN MED DANG SMON MED DANG MNGON PAR ‘DU BYA BA MED PA DANG, MA SKYES PA DANG MA [f. 131a] BYUNG BA LA YANG DE BZHIN DU GSUNGS PA DRANGS TE,

We see as well a comparable section referred to with the pronouncement that nothing has any signs; there are no wishes for the future; nothing has been put together; nothing has been born; and nothing has ever happened.


[1756]
CHOS RNAMS LA RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I RANG BZHIN YOD NA, CHOS DE RNAMS RANG NGOS NAS STONG PAR MA SONG BAS CHOS RNAMS NYID STONG PA DANG ZHES PA MI ‘THAD LA,

If things did have a nature to them which existed by definition, then we could never say that these same things were, from their side, empty.  And then it would be incorrect to say things like we just saw: “The very nature of those things is their emptiness.”


[1757]
RANG NGOS NAS NGO BO NYID KYIS YOD PA MA BKAG PAR, GZHAN ZHIG GIS STONG PA’I SGO NAS STONG BAR BSTAN DGOS PAS, STONG PA NYID KYIS CHOS RNAMS STONG PAR MI BYED CES PA DANG ‘GAL BAS

And if we weren’t going to deny that things could exist, from their own side, through some nature of their own, then we would have to demonstrate that they were empty through being empty of some other thing.  And then we would contradict the statement that “it’s not as if the fact of emptiness is making those things empty.”


[1758]
DBU MA’I LAM GYIS CHOS RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN LA SO SOR RTOG PA NA, CHOS RNAMS RANG NGOS NAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PAR STON PAR YIN PAR BSTAN NO,,

And so all this would mean that what’s being said is that—when we use the path of the middle way to make a thorough investigation of the nature of things—what we’re learning is that things are empty of existing through any nature where they could be coming from their own side.


[1759]
MDO ‘DIS NI RNAM RIG PAS GZHAN DBANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAS MI STONG BA DANG, DE GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD PA MED PAS STONG ZHES PA YANG BKAG LA,

This sutra is also serving to deny the idea of the Mentalists that those entities which arise at the pleasure of their causes & conditions are not empty of existing by definition; and the idea that these things are empty because there cannot exist any state of mind holding to an object, and any object being held by it, which are such that it is not true that to be one is to be the other.


[1760]
BRGYA PA LAS,
,STONG MIN STONG LDAN MTHONG MIN TE,
,MYANG ‘DAS BDAG GIR GYUR CIG CES,
,LOG LTAS MYA NGAN MI ‘DA’ BAR,
,DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS KYIS GSUNGS,
ZHES DANG,

As The Hundred puts it,

	Its not as though we see
	Something that’s not empty
	As having emptiness;

	For Those Gone Thus
Have stated that
The statement that
“I’ve made nirvana my own”

Is a wrong view which means
You have not reached nirvana.


[1761]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,STONG NYID LTA BA THAMS CAD NI,
,NGES PAR ‘BYIN PAR RGYAL BAS GSUNGS,
,GANG DAG STONG PA NYID LTA BA,
,DE DAG BSGRUB TU MED PAR GSUNGS,
ZHES PAS KYANG SNGAR GYI MDO’I DON DE NYID ‘CHAD DO,,

Wisdom also says—

	The victorious Buddhas have stated
	That emptiness functions
	To destroy all of those views.

	And they say as well
That those with a view
	Of emptiness can never
	Be sustained.	

These lines as well are expressing the same point as the sutra listed above.	


[1762]
CHOS RNAMS RANG GI NGO BOS STONG ZHES PA’I BSAM DON YANG DE NYID YIN GYI, BUM PA BUM PAS MI STONG BAR BDEN PAS STONG PA NI, GZHAN STONG YIN PAS BUM PA BUM PAS STONG PA NI RANG STONG YIN NO ZHES SMRA BA NI GTAN NAS MI [f. 131b] RIGS TE,

The thought behind the expression “All entities are empty of any essential nature” is, also, exactly that.  We do see people saying things like “The fact that things are empty of any real existence of their own, in the form of a water pitcher not being empty of being a water pitcher, is other-emptiness.  As such, the fact that a water pitcher is empty of being a water pitcher is self-emptiness.”  This idea though is completely irrational.


[1763]
BUM PA BUM PAS STONG NA BUM PA LA BUM PA MED DGOS NA, RANG LA RANG MED NA GZHAN SU LA YANG MED PAS BUM PA GTAN MED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

That is, suppose that—if a water pitcher is empty of being a water pitcher—then that water pitcher must be non-existent.  In this case, the pitcher could not exist in any way at all; because if the pitcher itself has no possibility of having the pitcher itself with it, then it couldn’t ever be with anything else either.


[1764]
DE’I TSE DNGOS PO GZHAN THAMS CAD KYANG DE DANG ‘DRA BAS, DE LTAR SMRA MKHAN YANG MED PAR ‘GYUR ZHING, ‘DIS STONG PA DANG ‘DIS MI STONG ZHES PA’I RNAM GZHAG GANG YANG MI SRID PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

In such an instance, then all other entities too would be similar; which means that the person expressing the opinion itself would also have to not exist.  And then it would be completely impossible to ever put forth any positions where we said that something was empty of one thing, or not empty of something else.


[1765]
DE ‘DRA BA’I STONG PA DE KHA CIG YANG DAG TU SMRA LA, GZHAN DAG CHAD STONG DU ‘DOD PA GNYIS KA YANG RTEN ‘BREL RTAG CHAD KYI MTHA’ DANG BRAL BAR RGYAL BA RGYAL SRAS KYIS LAN CIG MA YIN PAR BSGRUBS PA LAS PHYI ROL TU GYUR PA YIN NO,,

And so some people say that these kinds of emptiness are correct forms of emptiness; while others say that they represent an emptiness of things simply discontinuing.  Both of these parties though have left behind what the Victors and the children of these Victors have established—have “sustained,” and certainly no single time—as dependent events, free of the extremes of all things remaining forever unchanging, or simply discontinuing.


[1766]
KHYAD PAR DU KUN RDZOB BDEN PA THAMS CAD KHO RANG KHO RANG GIS STONG PAR GTAN LA ‘BEBS DGOS ZER NAS, DE CHAD STONG DU ‘DOD PA NI MI RIGS PA KHO NA STE, GRUB MTHA’ BZHI PO SU YANG LTA BA DE CHAD LTA YIN PAR SHES NAS, DE RANG GI RGYUD LA SKYED PAR BYED PA SU YANG MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Let’s look more particularly at the claim here that we must establish all instances of deceptive reality through saying that they are empty of being themselves.  The belief that this then represents the emptiness of things simply discontinuing is nothing but mistaken.  It doesn’t matter which of the four classical schools a person might belong to; everybody in all the schools realizes that this is simply the view that things would, indeed, have simply discontinued.  As such, there is not a single person in all these schools that would attempt to engender this viewpoint within their own mindstream.


[1767]
DES NA DGAG GZHI DE DGAG BYA’I NGO BOR MED PA DANG, GZHI DE DGAG BYAS STONG TSUL YANG YIN PAS STONG PAR ‘DRA BZHIN DU, CHOS RNAMS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NI RANG GI NGO BOS STONG PA’I DON YIN LA,

As such, we can say that the object which we assert lacks a certain quality represents an absence of sharing any essence of that quality; and we can also say that this is equivalent to the way in which this object is empty of the particular quality that we deny about it.  These two are both ways in which we can describe the object as “empty.”  Similarly, the fact that entities are empty of existing in any way by definition is exactly what it means when we say they are empty of any essence of their own.  
 

[1768]
DE LAS GZHAN PA’I STONG TSUL RNAMS RANG GI NGO BOS STONG PA MIN PA’I RGYU MTSAN NI, STONG TSUL SNGA MA TSAD MAS GRUB ZIN BYED PA MA NYAMS PA’I RING LA, GRUB MTHAS GZHI DE BDEN PA’AM DE’I DON DU YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA’I SGRO ‘DOGS SKYE MI SRID LA, PHYI MA RNAMS KYI DON TSAD MAS GRUB [f. 132a] CING BYED PA MA NYAMS KYANG, GRUB MTHA’ BDEN PA’AM BDEN PA’I DON DU SGRO ‘DOGS PA MI ‘GAL BA’O,,

And what then is the reason why we say that ways in which things could be empty that are different than these particular ways do not represent an emptiness of some kind of self-essence?   Suppose that those previous ways in which we described things as being empty had already been confirmed by accurate perception; and we were all still sitting in a place where none of those confirmations had in any way declined.  It would in that state be impossible for us to hold a school of thought which took those same examples of things to exist in truth; neither would it be possible for there to grow, within our minds, that form of overestimation where we held that things could exist in this same kind of truth.  The idea in the latter cases here would be that a certain point had been confirmed by an accurate perception, and that the working of this perception had in no way declined; and yet this would not preclude overestimation through a learned philosophical school which said that a certain object was real; or even described what it was to be real.



Normal reality
cannot stand up
under true analysis

[1769]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above, where we deny the belief that things could exist by definition, through demonstrating that it would have to be the case that nominal reality could stand up under logical analysis.


[1770]
‘DIR SMRAS PA DON DAM PAR SKYE BA MED PAS BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA DGAG LA RAG MOD, GZUGS DANG TSOR BA SOGS TSAD MA GNYIS KYIS DMIGS PA DE DAG GI RANG BZHIN NI GDON MI ZA BAR GZHAN LAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR RO, ,CI STE DE LTAR MI ‘DOD NA BDEN PA GNYIS SU CI STE BRJOD DE BDEN PA GCIG KHO NAR ‘GYUR RO, ,DE’I PHYIR GZHAN LAS SKYE BA YOD DO ZHES ZER RO,,

Now suppose that someone comes with the following claim about what we have said here—

Admitted that the assertion that nothing can start in an ultimate way is something that depends upon disproving that things could start either from themselves, or from something other than themselves.  But let’s take things like physical form and feelings—objects that are confirmed by either one of the two types of accurate perception.  The nature of these things is, beyond any possible debate, that they grow from things that are other than themselves.  In the event that we deny this, then how can we say that there are two types of reality?  It would all have to be but a single reality.  Thus it is that we can say that there certainly does exist the fact of things growing from things other than themselves.


[1771]
‘DI LTAR RGOL BA NI DON DAM PAR SKYE BA MED PA DANG, THA SNYAD DU GZHAN SKYE ‘DOD PAR SNANG BAS DBU MA RANG RGYUD PA ‘GA’ ZHIG GO 

Those who offer this kind of argument would appear to be accepting the idea that there is no growing of things in an ultimate sense, but that things do grow from other things, in a nominal sense.  As such they can only be members of the Independent group within the Middle Way school.


[1772]
,RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA’I GZHAN SKYE KUN RDZOB TU MI ‘DOD NA BDEN PA GCIG KHO NAR ‘GYUR ZHES PA NI, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS SKYE BA KUN RDZOB TU MED NA YANG DAG KUN RDZOB MED PAR ‘GYUR LA, DE’I TSE KUN RDZOB BDEN PA MI SRID PAS DON DAM BDEN PA GCIG PUR  ‘GYUR ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

Some would say that “If we don’t accept the idea that things could grow—in a deceptive way, and through some nature of their own—from things other than themselves, then there will only be a single reality.”  What this is saying is that—if, deceptively, there is no birth of things by definition—then we cannot say that there exists any correct form of the deceptive.  In that case then it would be impossible for there to exist any deceptive reality; and there could only exist, they would say, the single reality: the ultimate one.


[1773]
DE’I LAN DU ‘DI BDEN MOD KYI DON DAM PAR NI BDEN PA GNYIS YOD PA MA YIN TE, DGE SLONG DAG BDEN PA DON DAM PA ‘DI NI GCIG STE, ‘DI LTA STE MI SLU BA’I CHOS CAN MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA’O, ,’DU BYED THAMS CAD NI BRDZUN PA SLU BA’I CHOS CAN NO ZHES ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

In response we can say that this assertion is true; but that it was never the case that two realities existed, in any ultimate sense.  After all, Lord Buddha himself said,

O monks, there is only one reality which is ultimate; and here’s the way it is: the one thing that cannot deceive us is nirvana.  All factors in the world are things that lie—things that deceive us.


[1774]
DE DAG GI DON NI RANG GIS KHAS LEN PA’I BDEN PA’I DON NI MI SLU BA YIN PAS, MI SLU BA’I BDEN PA KHO NAR ‘GYUR BAS DE ‘DIR [f. 132b] BDEN MOD CES GSUNGS SO,,

The import of these points is that what we accept as the meaning of “truth” is something which does not deceive us; and we would have to say then that there is only that one truth—the one which does not deceive us.  We would have to say that this is, admittedly, true.


[1775]
DON DAM PAR NI ZHES PA NI DE KHO NA NYID GZIGS PA’I NGOR NI, KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA GNYIS MED DE, DE’I NGOR NI DON DAM BDEN PA NYAG GCIG TU GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’O,,

And when we say “ultimately speaking,” what we are saying is that—to the perceptions of someone who is seeing the way things really are—there are no two realities: no deceptive and ultimate versions.  And so what this is all saying is that—to the perceptions of such a person—there is only that one & only reality, the ultimate one.


[1776]
BDEN PA DAM PA NI DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA’O,,

The highest truth then is the ultimate truth.


[1777]
YE SHES DE’I NGOR KUN RDZOB BDEN PA MED PA NI SLU BA’I CHOS CAN DU GSUNGS PAS SHES SO,,

And when we say that deceptive reality does not exist in the perceptions of this particular wisdom, we should understand that what’s being said then is that this reality is an example of something which deceives us.


[1778]
DON BSDU NA CHOS RNAMS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB NA ‘DU BYED RNAMS BRDZUN PA SLU BA’I CHOS CAN DU MI ‘GRUB PAS, KUN RDZOB BDEN PA MED PA’I PHYIR BDEN PA GNYIS MED PAR ‘GYUR LA, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PA’I PHYOGS LA NI, KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM BDEN PA GNYIS KA YOD CES PA’I DON NO,,

To summarize, we can say that if things existed by definition, then it would not be the case that the various factors were things that were lying to us: deceiving us.  And in this case, there would be no deceptive form of reality; which means that there would then be no two realities.  And what this is all really saying is that—when we take the position that there is nothing in the universe that exists by definition—then there can exist the two realities: deceptive and ultimate.


[1779]
GAL TE SNGAR GYI LUNG GIS MYANG ‘DAS GCIG PU BDEN GYI, ‘DU BYED GZHAN BRDZUN PAR GSUNGS PAS ‘DUS BYAS RNAMS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS MA GRUB KYANG, MYANG ‘DAS DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MA YIN NAM SNYAM NA,

Now someone might think to themselves the following:

Well then, the lines you just quoted were saying that only nirvana is true; and that other things, factors, were false.  Wouldn’t this then imply that—although produced things are not things which exist by definition—nirvana, or ultimate reality, does exist by definition?


[1780]
DE’I BDEN PA NI MDO NYID LAS MI SLU BA’I CHOS CAN ZHES GSUNGS PAS MI SLU BA’I DON DU BSHAD KYI, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I BDEN PA NI MA YIN NA, ,’DU BYED THAMS CAD NI BRDZUN PA SLU BA’I CHOS CAN ZHES GSUNGS PAS KYANG SNGA MA’I BDEN PA MI SLU BA’I DON DU SHES SO,,

That type of reality is described in the sutra itself as being something that never deceives us; as such, this is what’s being explained as the meaning of “never deceives.”  But if saying that a truth existed by definition were not what “never deceives” refers to, then we would have to understand that “all the factors there are lie to us: they deceive us” was what it meant for the first truth to be something that did not deceive us.


[1781]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS KYANG, ‘DUS BYAS LOG PAR SNANG NAS BYIS PA SLU BAR BYED PA BZHIN DU, MYANG ‘DAS DON DAM PAS DE LTAR SNANG NAS MI SLU BAS MYANG ‘DAS BDEN PA DANG, GZHAN RNAMS MI BDEN [f. 133a] PAR GSUNGS PAR BSHAD PAS, BDEN MI BDEN GNYIS SU PHYE BA NI SLU MI SLU’I DON YIN PAR GDON MI ZA BAR ‘DOD PAR BYA’O,,

The commentary to the Sixty Verses describes how composed things appear in a wrong way and deceive infants; whereas—since nirvana is ultimate—it does not appear in this way, and does not deceive.  As such then, nirvana is described as being real, and the others as not being real.  We can thus say that the position being taken here is that the division into two realities is being made according to whether or not things are deceiving us.


[1782]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS MYANG ‘DAS KUN RDZOB TU BDEN PAR GSUNGS PA NI, MYANG ‘DAS DON DAM PA’I BDEN PAR YOD PA KUN RDZOB PA’I NGOR ‘JOG PA’I DON YIN GYI, THA SNYAD DU DE BDEN PAR BZHED PA MIN NO,,

When the commentary to the Sixty Verses says that nirvana is, in a deceptive way, real, what it means is that—to deceptive perceptions—nirvana is established as existing as reality which is ultimate.  The work is not though saying that, in nominal terms, that is being accepted as real.


[1783]
DE LTAR NA KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA NI DON DAM BDEN PA LA ‘JUG PA’I THABS YIN PA’I PHYIR, BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA MA DPYAD PAR ‘JIG RTEN PA’I LUGS KYIS THA SNYAD BYED PA BZHIN DU, DBU MA PAS KYANG KHAS LEN PAR BYED DO,,

We can say then that deceptive reality can serve as a means for people to engage in ultimate reality.  And so it’s similar to the way that people use terms in the way of the everyday world—without checking to see if things have grown from themselves, or from something other than themselves.  The way that those of the middle way accept things is similar.


	[1784]
[VI.35]
Arvāṅ na tattvātmakarūpato’mī
sthitiṃ labhante pravicāryamāṇāḥ,
Yataḥ padārthā na tato vicāraḥ
kāryo hi loka vyavahāra satye.

,GANG PHYIR DNGOS PO ‘DI DAG RNAM DPYAD NA,
,DE NYID BDAG CAN DNGOS LAS TSU ROL TU,
,GNAS RNYED MA YIN DE PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN GYI,
,THA SNYAD BDEN LA RNAM PAR DPYAD MI BYA,

In a selected case,
We might make an examination
Of these things, and then

We might not be able
To discover whether

Entities involved with suchness
Existed, in their nature,
Towards us.

As such,
In the nominal reality 
Of the everyday world,

No one undertakes
Those kinds of examination.


[1785]
‘DI LTAR GANG GI PHYIR GZUGS DANG TSOR BA LA SOGS PA’I DNGOS PO ‘DI DAG NI, CI BDAG LAS SKYE BA ZHIG GAM, CIG {%CI; our carving is wrong} GZHAN LAS SKYE BA ZHIG CES DE LTA BU LA SOGS PAR RNAM PAR DPYAD PA NA,

And so in a selected case we might make an examination of these things—physical form and feelings and the like—to determine whether we should say for example that “what they have grown from was themselves,” or “what they have grown from was something other than themselves.”


[1786]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI BDAG NYID CAN GYI DON DAM PAR MA SKYES PA DANG MA ‘GAGS PA LAS, TSU ROL TE GZHAN DU GYUR PA’I CHA SKYE BA LA SOGS PA CAN LA GNAS PA RNYED PA MA YIN TE,

And then we might not be able to discover whether—as opposed to demonstrating any of the starting or stopping in an ultimate sense, which we would see with entities involved with suchness itself—they existed in a way of coming towards us; which is to say, possessing some nature of growing or the like, where they displayed an aspect of evolving into something else.


[1787]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN THA SNYAD KYI BDEN PA LA BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS ZHES BYA BA DE LTA BU LA SOGS PA’I RNAM PAR DPYAD PAR MI BYA BAR, ‘JIG RTEN PAS MTHONG BA ‘DI YOD NA ‘DI ‘BYUNG NGO ZHES BYA BA ‘DI TZAM ZHIG GZHAN ‘JIG RTEN LA RAG LAS PA’I THA SNYAD LA ‘JUG PA’I SGO NAS KHAS BLANG BAR BYA STE,

As such, in the nominal reality of the everyday world, no one undertakes those kinds of examination, where we try to make determinations like “from itself,” or “from something other than itself,” or the like.  People in the world say things like “If there’s something in front of us that we can see, then it must have happened”; and “but these other things, they are something else.”  And what we’re saying is that we accept things relying upon the application of terms as we see them in the everyday world.


[1788]
‘PHAGS PA LHAS,
,JI LTAR KLA KLO SKAD GZHAN GYIS,
,GZUNG BAR MI NUS DE BZHIN DU,
,’JIG [f. 133b] RTEN PA YI MA GTOGS PAR,
,’JIG RTEN GZUNG BAR NUS MA YIN,
ZHES DANG,

As Master Aryadeva puts it,

	The words that barbarians speak
	In another language
	Are not something that
	The rest of us could grasp.

	Just so, those of the world
	Are unable to grasp
	Anything but that
	Which belongs to the world.


[1789]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,THA SNYAD LA NI MA BRTEN PAR,
,DAM PA’I DON NI RTOGS MI ‘GYUR,
,DAM PA’I DON NI MA RTOGS PAR,
,MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA THOB MI ‘GYUR,
ZHES DANG,

Wisdom says as well—

Without relying on terms,
There’s no way
That we could realize
The ultimate meaning of things.

And if we fail to realize
This ultimate meaning of things,
There’s no way that we could ever
Achieve the state of nirvana.


[1790]
RTZOD ZLOG LAS,
,THA SNYAD KHAS NI MA BLANGS PAR,
,NGED CAG ‘CHAD PAR MI BYED DO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

Stopping All Argument, finally, puts it this way:

It’s not that we are saying
That we refuse all terms.


[1791]
‘DIR DPYAD MA DPYAD NI DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYAD MA DPYAD YIN LA, DE YANG DPYOD LUGS JI TZAM ZHIG NAS DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYAD PAR ‘GRO BA SHES PA GAL CHE BAS

When we talk about “examining” or “not examining” here, what we’re referring to is examining the way things really are, or not.  Now in this regard, it is very important that we understand just what manner of examining things constitutes examining the way things really are.


[1792]
CUNG ZAD BSHAD NA THAL ‘GYUR BA’I LUGS KYIS NI, THA SNYAD GDAGS PAS MA TSIM PAR MYU GU SKYE ZHES PA LTA BU LA, DE LTAR BTAGS PA’I BTAGS DON BDAG GAM GZHAN LAS SKYE ZHES TSOL BA NAS DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PAR ‘JOG GO

As such, I will offer just a brief explanation of that point here.  According to the system of the Consequence group within the Middle Way school, it constitutes an examination of the way things really are if—when for example we call something a “sprout”—we aren’t content to leave things at applying the term.  Rather, we dig into it to see whether we can say that the thing which we have applied this kind of term to is something that has grown from itself, or from something other than itself.


[1793]
,DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KYIS GANG NAS ‘ONGS GANG DU ‘GRO ZHES PA DANG, PHYI DANG NANG GANG NA YOD CES SOGS KYI DPYAD PA RNAMS DANG GTAN MI ‘DRA BA SHES PAR BYA’O,,

As such, you should understand that the case here is totally different from instances such as where, for example, in the parlance of the everyday world we examine where it is that a thing has come from, and where it is headed to; or we check to see whether something is sitting outside, or inside.


[1794]
RANG RGYUD PA RNAMS KYIS NI DE TZAM NAS DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PAR MI ‘JOG GI ,SNGAR BSHAD PA BZHIN GYI SHES PA LA SNANG BA’I DBANG GIS YOD PAR BZHAG GAM, DE’I DBANG GIS BZHAG PA MIN PA’I DON GYI SDOD LUGS NAS GRUB PA YIN DPYOD PA NAS,

This in itself though is not enough—according to those who belong to the Independent group within this same Middle Way school—to say that we are examining the way that things really are.  They would investigate whether, first of all, things are established as existing by force of their making their appearance to a state of mind, as we described it before.  Or else they would try to see if things were not established in this manner; but, rather, simply from the way that the object itself existed in the world.


[1795]
DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PAR ‘GRO STE, DGAG BYA’I NGOS ‘DZIN MI ‘DRA BA’I GNAD KYIS, DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD MTSAMS KYANG MI ‘DRA BA GNYIS ‘ONG NGO,,

This, for them, would then constitute that analysis of the way things really are.  As such, we can say that the crucial point here is the two different ways in which the two groups identify what it is that emptiness denies; and then from this are derived the two different ways of defining the point at which something becomes an analysis of the way things really are.


[1796]
DE LTAR MA GO BAR DPER NA GNAS ‘DIR LHAS BYIN DON LA MA ‘ONGS PA LA, [f. 134a] DANG PO ‘ONGS PAR ‘KHRUL DE NAS ‘ONGS MA ‘ONGS BRTAGS PA NA, MA ‘ONGS PAR SHES PA LTA BU LA BYAS NAS,

Some though fail to understand this point.  We can look at the example of first making an error of thinking that John has arrived to the place where we are, when in fact he has yet to come.  We then check whether he has arrived or not, and realize that he hasn’t.


[1797]
MA DPYAD PA’I RNAM GZHAG THAMS CAD LOG PA’I DON CAN KHO NA DANG, DPYAD PA’I RNAM GZHAG RNAMS MA LOG PAR ‘DOD PA NI DBU TSAD GANG GI YANG LUGS MA YIN TE, GNYIS KA’I LUGS KYIS MA DPYAD PA’I RNAM GZHAG LA TSAD MAS GRUB PA DU MA ZHIG ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO, ,RGYAS PAR GZHAN DU BSHAD ZIN PAS MA SPROS SO,,

Just so, all determinations that we make about things without any real examination result in nothing other than erroneous conclusions.  And claiming that different ways of making the examination are not mistaken is not the position of any school which counts itself part of the Middle Way; since, for that matter, there are many points in positions not examined by either system which can indeed be confirmed by accurate perception.  I have in the past expanded on these points significantly elsewhere; and so I will not present more detail on them here.


[1798]
DE LTAR DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PAS KUN RDZOB PA RNAMS LA DPYOD NA NI, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I THA SNYAD THAMS CAD NYAMS PAR ‘GYUR BAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

This then is the way in which you should understand the way in which—when we examine deceptive objects using the logic which examines the real nature of things—all expressions of the everyday world collapse.



A tiny bit, on the point

[1799]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to the third of our three parts here: making the same denial that things could exist by definition, by showing that—in the same case—we could never deny that things started in any ultimate way.


	[1800]
[VI.36]
Tattvādhikāre hi yayaiva yuktyā
svasmāt parasmāc ca na janma yuktam,
Yuktyā tayaiva vyavahārato’pi
na yujyate kena tavāstu janma.

,DE NYID SKABS SU RIGS PA GANG ZHIG GIS,
,[206a] BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA RIGS MIN PA’I,
,RIGS DES THA SNYAD DU YANG RIGS MIN PAS,
,KHYOD KYI SKYE BA GANG GIS YIN PAR ‘GYUR,

Use the same rationale
As at the point of
	The way things are:

	That it would be illogical [f. 206a]
	To say that a thing
	Could have grown

	Either from itself,
	Or from something different.

	This very same reasoning
	Applies in nominal cases
	As well, to show that
	It could not be logical.

	What kind can you point to,
	For the growing?


[1801]
CI STE YANG DE LTAR DNGOS PO LA BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA THAMS CAD GCOD PA NA, BRED SHA ‘THON PA THA SNYAD KYI BDEN PA LA BDEN PAR ZHEN PA ‘DI GANG KUN BYANG GNYIS KYI ‘CHING GROL GYI RGYUR ‘GYUR BA, RDZAS TE RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I BDAG NYID ‘GA’ ZHIG TU SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA CIG BYA DGOS SO ZHES SMRA NA, DE SKAD DU SMRA BA LA NI TSIG TZAM ZHIG LHAG MAR LUS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Well now, how is it?  Suppose that, as we’ve described it, people start to eliminate all of their tendencies to grasp to things existing in reality.  Then though their faces take on a certain look of panic, and they start feeling a strong belief that nominal reality though must be real.  That is, they begin to say that there must exist objects which act as causes behind the bondage and the liberation going on with the negative side of things, and the enlightened side of things.  And they feel that these causes must be creating some number of entities which are substantial; that is, which exist by definition.  But these kinds of proclamations end up just being all words, and nothing else.


[1802]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, JI LTAR DE KHO NA NYID DON DAM PA LA DPYOD PA’I SKABS SU, JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I RIGS PA GANG ZHIG GIS GZUGS SOGS BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA RIGS PA MIN PA DE BZHIN DU, THA SNYAD DU YANG RIGS PA DE NYID KYIS SKYE BAR RIGS PA MIN PAS, KHYOD KYI RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA TSAD MA GANG GIS ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR [f. 134b] RO,,

And why can we say that?  The fact is that the case here is just the same as it was at the point where we were examining the way things really are; that is, the ultimate.  We can use the same rationale that we expressed there, and say that it would be illogical to say that physical form or the like could have grown either from itself, or from something other than itself.  This very same reasoning applies in nominal cases as well, to show that it could not be logical to say that things were growing.  Thus the question remains, of what kind of accurate perception you can point to in order to establish things’ growing through some nature of their own.  Because, in fact, no such perception exists.


[1803]
DE’I PHYIR RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS SKYE BA NI BDEN PA GNYIS CAR DU YANG YOD PA MA YIN NO ZHES MI ‘DOD BZHIN DU YANG, GDON MI ZA BAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’O ZHES GSUNGS PAS,

What this is saying is that, therefore, your growing of things by definition is something that can exist with neither one of the two realities, at all.  This is a fact that—even though you dearly want to avoid agreeing to it—you must in the end come to accept.


[1804]
DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PAS MI SNYAD DU YANG SKYE BA ‘GOG PA’I SKYE BA NI, MTSAMS SBYOR DU RDZAS KYI BDAG NYID KYI SKYE BA LA BSHAD CING, DON BSDUR SNGAR LTAR BSHAD PAS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS SKYE BA ZHES DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA KHO NA LA YIN GYI, SKYE TZAM LA NI GTAN MIN TE, THA SNYAD PA’I DON LA DON DAM PA’I DPYAD PA BYAR MI RUNG BAR LAN DU MAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now let’s consider a growing where you use reasoning which is examining the way things really are, to deny growing even in a nominal sense.  If we were to fill out the wording here, it would be saying that the kind of growing we’re talking about is a growing which consists of some kind of substantial entity.  And to address this briefly, what they’re talking about is just the same kind of growing by definition that we spoke about earlier; it’s just that they’ve added some additional qualifier to the object we deny.  We are not though referring at all to a simple case of growing; for it has been stated over & over that it’s disallowable to apply an examination into the ultimate, when the object under consideration exists only nominally.


[1805]
DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PAS THA SNYAD DU RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I SKYE BA MI KHEGS NA, DON DAM PAR GRUB PA’I SKYE BA YANG MI KHEGS PAR BZHED PA NI RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA TZAM NAS BDEN GRUB TU ‘GYUR BAS, DE LA THA SNYAD DU ZHES SBYAR MA SBYAR ‘DRA BAR BZHED PA’O,,

Some would take the position that—if we cannot use reasoning which is examining the way things really are to deny a case of growing which exists by definition in a nominal sense—then neither could we deny a case of growing which exists ultimately.  But taking this position is, then, to take the position that—since something exists in truth as soon as it exists by definition—it would be the same whether or not you went on to add the qualifier “in a nominal sense.”


[1806]
DE LTAR NA DGAG BYA LA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS DANG, RANG BZHIN GYIS DANG, RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS ZHES SOGS KYI KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA NI MTHA’ YAS PA CIG MDO SDE DANG, YAB SRAS GNYIS DANG SLOB DPON ‘DI’I GZHUNG LAS ‘BYUNG LA, DE ‘DRA BA DE ‘GOG PA’I TSE DBU MA PA KHA CIG PHYOGS SNGAR BYAS PA NI SNGAR BSHAD PA DANG,

We see an infinite number of qualifiers applied to the object we deny here: “by definition”; “by nature”; “through some essence of its own,” and so on.  And these occur in the collection of sutras; as well as in the major writings of the father and his spiritual son—and in those of our master here.  And so consider the denial when it’s made as we’ve described it here—where certain members of the Middle Way school take the part of the disputant, and the case with them is as we’ve just been describing it.


[1807]
TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG, ‘DI NI DE KHO NA LTAR GDON MI ZA BAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA STE, DE LTA MA YIN NA KUN RDZOB ‘THAD PA DANG LDAN PA MA YIN NAM, DES NA ‘DI DE KHO NA NYID DU ‘GYUR GYI KUN RDZOB TU MI ‘GYUR RO, ZHES [f. 135a] THA SNYAD DU BTAGS PA TZAM GYIS MI CHOG PAR BTAGS DON BTZAL BA’I DPYAD PA BYAS NAS THA SNYAD PA’I DON ‘JOG PA BKAG PA NA,

On this point we see A Clarification of the Verses also denying that we could establish the meaning of things existing nominally through a process where—without being satisfied just with describing this existence as something being labelled with terms—we go further and carry out an analysis where we search out the product of the labeling process:

This can only be accepted—beyond any shadow of a doubt—as referring to the way things are.  If that were not the case, then we ask you: wouldn’t it then be correct to say that it was the deceptive here?  As such, this can only be a reference to the way things really are, and not to the deceptive.


[1808]
DE LTA NA DON DAM PAR YOD PAR ‘GYUR BA DANG, GZUGS SOGS KUN RDZOB PAR MI ‘GYUR ZHES GZUGS SOGS DON DAM DU GRUB PAR KHAS MI LEN PA DANG, KUN RDZOB PAR ‘JOG PA CIG LA ‘PHEN LA, DE YANG DNGOS POR SMRA BA LA MIN PAS DBU MA RANG RGYUD PA YIN PAR SHIN TU GSAL LO,,

In this case what you’re saying is that things do exist in an ultimate way, but that physical form and the like don’t exist in a deceptive way.  Which is to say, by implication, that there must be someone else who takes the position that form and the rest cannot exist in an ultimate way, and must then be said to exist in a deceptive way.  And there is no one among the Functionalists who would fit this description; which means that it’s very clear that you are referring to someone who belongs to the Independent group with in the Middle Way school.


[1809]
‘DIR SLOB DPON GYIS KHA CIG ‘PHAGS PA’I ZHAL SNGA NAS, BDAG LAS MA YIN GZHAN LAS MIN, ZHES SOGS KYI GZHUNG GIS SKYE BA SOGS BKAG PA NI, GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD PA’I KUN BRTAGS KYI SKYE BA SOGS BKAG PA YIN GYI, GZHAN DBANG BDEN PA BKAG PA MIN PAR ‘DOD PA

At this point, the Master starts talking about how some people refer to the lines from The Realized One which include “Things don’t grow from themselves”;  that is, how these words deny growing and the like.  They believe that what this is denying is a growing to imagined entities, where the object held by a perception and the perception holding it could ever be such that to be one was not to be the other.  They would not say though that this was a denial that things under the control of others could ever be real.


[1810]
‘DI YANG, DE LTAR ‘GREL PA’I GTAN TSIGS MED PAR MI ‘GRUB PAS, DE SKAD DU SMRA BA LA NI BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PAR BYA BA KHO NA’O, ZHES BSHAD PA’I PHYOGS SNGA SMRA BA NI, SNGA RABS PA KHA CIG SLOB DPON BLO BRTAN LA SOGS PA YIN PAR SMRA MOD KYANG, DE’I GZHUNG NA DE LTAR BSHAD PA MI SNANG NGO,,

At this point, the autocommentary says that “since without a proper syllogism the point could not be made, making this statement is simple argumentation, and conjecture.”  Now admitted that some thinkers of the earlier generation here in Tibet have expressed the opinion that the opponent in the argument here is Master Sthiramati, or someone like that; but I have not observed in his writings any such explanation.


[1811]
BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PAR SLOB DPON CHOS SKYONG GIS BZHI BRGYA PA’I LTA BA SEMS TZAM DU BKRAL BAR BSHAD PAS DE LA SBYAR NA ‘GRIG GO

In his commentary to the 400 Verses, Master Dharmapala explains the viewpoints of the 400 as commenting upon the Mind Only school; and it would seem acceptable to apply that here.


[1812]
,’O NA ZAB MO’I MDO’I DON SEMS TZAM DU ‘GREL PA RNAMS KYIS ‘PHAGS PA’I GZHUNG RNAMS KYI DON JI LTAR DU ‘GREL ZHE NA,

“Well then,” one may ask.  “How is it that those who interpret the meaning of sutras on the profound as following the ideas of the Mind Only comment upon the meaning of the works of the Realized One?”


[1813]
SLOB DPON DBYIG GNYEN LA SOGS PA’I CHEN PO RNAMS KYI GZHUNG NA, KLU SGRUB KYI GZHUNG [f. 135b] GI DON ‘DI LTAR ‘GREL PA YIN ZHES GSAL BAR MI SNANG YANG,

Now it is not the case that we see clear references in the great books of great masters like Vasubandhu which interpret the import of Nagarjuna in this way.


[1814]
RNAM BSHAD RIGS PA LA SOGS PAR DGONGS ‘GREL GYI MDO LA BRTEN NAS SHER PHYIN GYI MDO DRANG DON DU ‘CHAD PAR SNANG BAS,

There do appear though references in works like Reasoning in Explanation which—basing their arguments on What I Really Meant—explain the sutras of the perfection of wisdom as being figurative.


[1815]
DE BZHIN DU ‘CHAD PAR MNGON TE ‘PHAGS PA’I GZHUNG ‘GOG PA NI MI SRID LA, SGRA JI BZHIN PAR ‘CHAD NA NI SHER PHYIN GYI MDO SGRA JI BZHIN PAR MI ‘CHAD PA MI MDZAD CIG, SGRA JI BZHIN PA DRANG DON DU BSHAD NA DE’I DON SEMS TZAM DU ‘CHAD DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And they might indeed appear to be making their explanation this way.  It is flatly impossible to refute the great classics of the Realized One; but don’t think that if you interpret them as being literal, you can’t also explain the sutras of the perfection of wisdom as being literal.  And that’s because—if you interpret what is meant literally as something which is figurative—then you would have to read the Realized One’s works as being Mind Only.


[1816]
‘ON KYANG CHOS THAMS CAD DON DAM PAR MA GRUB PA DANG, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS MA GRUB PAR BSHAD PA RNAMS SGRA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU RIGS PAS ‘GRUB PAS, SGRA JI BZHIN PA LA GNOD PA MED PA’I PHYIR, DRANG DON DU ‘GREL MI NUS PA LA DGONGS NAS, BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PAR BYA BA KHO NA’O ZHES GSUNGS TE,

The fact though is that explanations which say that nothing in the universe exists in an ultimate way; and that nothing exists by definition; can be established, by correct reasoning, as being literal.  Given this, people have thought that—since there is nothing to prevent us from taking the points literally—there is no way that we can explain them as being figurative.  And thus we come up with statements like “this is simple argumentation, and conjecture.”


[1817]
SGRA JI BZHIN PA’I BZLOG PHYOGS LA GNOD BYED DANG, DRANG THAD LA SGRUB BYED MTHA’ YAS PA CIG STON PA NI, GZHUNG GI DON RNAM PA GZHAN DU DRANG DU MI RUNG BAR SGRUB PA YIN PAS ‘DIR MDO TZAM LAS MA GSUNGS SO,,

Once we present problems with doing the opposite of taking something as literal, and once we have offered innumerable arguments in support of leaving off taking them as figurative, then we have established that it would be incorrect to interpret the meaning of a text as referring to something other than what it says directly.  As such, I have said no more than a tiny bit on the point here.



Illusions in the world

[1818]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from before: disproving any argument against our denial that things could exist by definition.


[1819]
GAL TE RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I SKYE BA BDEN LA {%PA scan is wrong = LA} GNYIS CAR DU YANG MED NA, GZUGS LA SOGS PA RNAMS MED PAR ‘GYUR LA, DE LTA NA GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I NGO BO MIG LA SOGS PA’I SHES PA LA ‘JIG RTEN DU DMIGS PAR MI ‘GYUR TE, DE LTA MA YIN NA RI BONG GI RVA LA SOGS PA YANG MIG LA SOGS PA’I SHES PA LA SNANG BAR ‘GYUR TE, RGYU MTSAN KUN NAS MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

One may begin with the following question—

Suppose then that it really is the case that a growing of things by definition exists with neither one of the two realities.  In this case, physical form and the rest could would have to be non-existent.  And in that case, then things that have the essential nature of form and the like could never be something that the awarenesses of the eye and such ever perceive, here in the everyday world.  And if that were the case, then even things like rabbit horns could make their appearance to the awarenesses of the eye and the like.  And that’s because the reasoning would be equivalent, in every respect.


	[1820]
[VI.37]
Śūnyāḥ padārthāḥ pratibimbakādyāḥ
sāmagryapekṣā na hi na prasiddhāḥ,
Yathā ca śūnyāt pratibimbakādeś
cetas tadākāram upaiti janma.

,DNGOS PO STONG PA GZUGS BRNYAN LA SOGS PA,
,TSOGS LA LTOS RNAMS MA GRAGS PA YANG MIN,
,JI LTAR DER NI GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS STONG LAS,
,SHES PA DE YI RNAM PA SKYE ‘GYUR LTAR,

		Things which are empty—
		A reflection in a mirror,
		And so on—
	
		Rely upon the coming together;
		And we cannot say
		This is something
		The world itself wouldn’t say.

		It’s just the same
		As there: a reflection
		And the like are empty,

		And from these grow
		Awareness which assumes
		The likeness of it.


	[VI.38]
Evaṃ hi śūnyā api sarva bhāvāḥ
śūnyebhya eva prabhavaṃ prayānti,
Nocchedinas te na ca śāśvatāś ca
satya dvaye’pi prakṛter abhāvāt.

[VI.38a]
	,DE BZHIN DNGOS PO THAMS CAD STONG NA YANG,
,STONG NYID DAG LAS RAB TU SKYE BAR ‘GYUR,
,BDEN PA GNYIS SU’ANG RANG BZHIN MED PA’I PHYIR,

		All functioning things—
		Even though they are empty—

		Quite certainly grow,
Just as these, from those
Of emptiness.


[1821]
[f. 136a] DE’I LAN BSHAD PA, DNGOS PO STONG PA STE BRDZUN PA GZUGS BRNYAN DANG LA SOGS PAS SGRA BRNYAN LA SOGS PA RNAMS, ME LONG DANG BYAD BZHIN DANG BRAG PHUG DANG, SGRA PHYUNG BA SOGS KYI RGYU RKYEN GYI TSOGS PA LA LTOS PA STE BRTEN NAS SKYE BA ‘JIG RTEN NA MA GRAGS PA YANG MIN TE GRAGS SO,,

In answer to this concern, let’s take things which are empty—which is to say, false; let’s take a reflection in a mirror and things that are covered in the wording “and so on”: things like echoes and such.  These are phenomena which rely upon the coming together of causes & conditions, such as a mirror and something standing in front of it; or the hollow of a cave, and a sound that someone emits.  That is to say, they grow in dependence—and we cannot say that this is something that the world itself wouldn’t say; that is, the world does say it.


[1822]
JI LTAR ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA DER NI GZUGS BRNYAN LA SOGS PA STONG BA STE BRDZUN PA LAS, MIG LA SOGS PA’I SHES PA GZUGS BRNYAN LA SOGS PA DE YI RNAM PA CAN SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA TAR {%LTAR},

The case here is just the same as we see it spoken of there in the world; that is, in that instance things like a reflection in the mirror and the like are empty—which is to say, false—and from these false things can grow kinds of awareness such as that of the eyes and such: awareness which assumes the likeness of the reflection and so on.


[1823]
BRDZUN PA’I GZUGS BRNYAN LAS BRDZUN PA’I RNAM PA CAN GYI SHES PA SKYE BA DE BZHIN DU, DNGOS PO THAMS CAD RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG NA’ANG, DES STONG PA’I RGYU DAG LAS DES STONG PA’I ‘BRAS BU RAB TU SKYE BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Just as a type of awareness can grow which has assumed the false form of the reflection which is itself false, all the functioning things there are—even though they are empty of existing by definition—quite certainly grow, as results that are empty of that existence flowing from causes that are also empty of it.


[1824]
‘DIR GZUGS BRNYAN LAS NI DE ‘DZIN PA’I MIG SHES SKYE BAR GSUNGS PAS, GZUGS BRNYAN DNGOS PO YIN ZHING SHES PA DANG NGO BO THA DAD PAS NI, PHYI ROL GYI DON YIN LA DE YANG MIG SHES KYI DMIGS RKYEN YIN PAS, GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED DU BZHED PA YIN TE, ZLA GNYIS DANG SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA DANG SGYU MA SOGS DANG, SGRA BRNYAN SOGS LA YANG DE BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

When this says that the visual awareness which grasps to a reflection has grown from a reflection, what it’s saying is that the reflection itself is an actual thing, and that it is not such that to be the awareness of it is to be the reflection.  As such, the reflection is an outside object, and is serving as an “object factor” for the arisal of the visual consciousness.  Thus then the reflection is accepted here as belonging to the door of sense of visible form.  You should understand appearances such as the doubled moon, and the hair in the sink—as well as illusions and echoes and the like—as being the same.


[1825]
DE LTAR NA DBANG SHES ‘KHRUL PA LA SNANG BA’I BYAD DANG ZLA GNYIS DANG SKRA SHAD SOGS NI, DBANG PO LA ‘PHRAL GYI GNOD PA MED PA’I SHES PA LNGA LA SNANG BA’I RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

And so what’s being said here is that when our sense perceptions are mistaken, and an object which is actually just a reflection in the mirror appears to us—or we see things like the two moons, or a hair lying there—it is similar to the case with our five sense perceptions when they are not affected by any adventitious defect, but things appear to them to exist by definition.


[1826]
BYAD BZHIN SOGS MI SRID KYANG DER SNANG BA NI  [f. 136b] RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA NI {%carving: add also MI} SRID KYANG DER SNANG BA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

A reflection which is actually the object reflected is an impossibility; but it can seem as though it is.  It is an impossibility for something to exist by definition; but it can seem as though it does—the cases are similar.


[1827]
GZUGS BRNYAN DANG SGRA BRNYAN LA SOGS PA NI GZUGS DANG SGRA LA SOGS PA DANG ‘DRA BAS, DES NA GZUGS SOGS LNGA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA PHYI ROL TU MI ‘JOG KYANG DER SNANG BA’I GZUGS SOGS PHYI ROL TU ‘JOG PA BZHIN DU, GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS BYAD BZHIN YIN PA SOGS PHYI ROL TU MI ‘JOG KYANG, GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS PHYI ROL TU ‘JOG STE DE GNYIS PHYI ROL TU ‘JOG MI ‘JOG MTSUNGS PA YIN NO,,

Reflections in a mirror, and echoes in a cave, and other such things are similar to actual visible forms, and sounds, and the like.  As such, even though we do not say that visible forms and the other four exist as outside objects which exist through some nature of their own, we can say that the visible form and such which appear to be this way are on the outside.  Similarly, we do not say that reflections and the like which are the actual image standing before the mirror and such exist on the outside; but we can say that the reflection and such themselves are on the outside—that is, the case here is the equivalent, when we are making the determination of whether these two are outside objects, or not.


[1828]
GZUGS BRNYAN BYAD BZHIN GYIS STONG PA TZAM GYI BRDZUN PA NI, STONG NYID STON PA’I LUNG RIGS GANG LA YANG BLO KHA MA PHYOGS PA’I ‘JIG RTEN PA’I RGAN PO BRDA BYANG THAMS CAD KYIS ‘GRUB PAS, DE LTAR RTOGS PA DE RIGS SHES RAGS PA CIG TU ‘DOD PA NI MI RIGS PA KHO NA’O,,

The concept of falseness in the form of a reflection in the mirror being simply empty of existing as the object standing in front of the mirror is something that even old geezers in the everyday world who understand the words we are using can establish as fact, without directing their minds in any way to forms of scripture and logic which present the concept of emptiness.  As such, portraying this kind of understanding as a coarse version of logical thinking is simply in error.


[1829]
GAL TE DE LTA NA NI GZUGS BRNYAN BRDZUN PAR GRAGS PA DE GRUB KYANG, DBU MA PAS BZHAG PA’I BRDZUN PAR MI ‘GRUB PAS, SNGA MA DE PHYI MA’I DPER JI LTAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,

One may come with the following question—

If that’s the way it is, and there really does exist a reflection which everyone admits is false, then it wouldn’t be false in the same was as the those of the Middle Way school describe it.  How then can you say that the former stands as an illustration of the latter?


[1830]
SKABS ‘DIR GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS DPER BKOD PA NI ‘JIG RTEN PAS GRUB ZIN DPER ‘GOD PA YIN GYI, DBU MA PAS BRDZUN PAR BZHAG PA GRUB ZIN PA CIG DPER ‘GOD PA MIN NO,,

When we present the reflection in a mirror and so on as examples in this particular context, we are only putting them forth as instances which are already accepted in the everyday world.  We are not putting them forth as examples of something which those of the Middle Way have already completed demonstrating as false.


[1831]
DE YANG BYAD BZHIN DU SNANG BA’I GZUGS BRNYAN LTA BU DE LA SNANG BA’I STENG NAS CHA ‘DI TZAM ZHIG BYAD BZHIN DU SNANG LA, ‘DI TZAM ZHIG BYAD BZHIN DU MI SNANG NGO ZHES RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU DBYE MI NUS LA,

It is not, moreover, the case in any way at all that we could ever make a distinction here where we say that—with something like a reflection that appears to actually be the object standing in front of the mirror—this particular part is appearing as that object; and this particular other part is not appearing as the object.


[1832]
BYAD BZHIN GYI GANG SNANG GI CHA THAMS CAD NAS SNANG BA LTAR DU YOD [f. 137a] PAS STONG YANG, RANG GI RGYU LA BRTEN NAS SKYE BA MI ‘GAL BA DPER BYAS NAS DE BZHIN DU SNGON PO RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR SNANG BA NA YANG, SNGON PO’I STENG NAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR SNANG MI SNANG GI CHA GNYIS DBYER MED PAR SNANG LA,

Rather, the reflection is appearing in a way where it is empty of existing as the object in front of the mirror in all of the parts of it which are making their appearance.  And yet there is still no contradiction in saying that this reflection is growing through reliance upon its particular causes.  And we can go ahead and use this as an illustration for describing how the color blue might act.  That is, the blue may appear as though it exists by definition; but it appears this way in a manner where we could never divide out a part of the blue which is appearing as though it exists by definition, and another part which does not appear as though it exists by definition.


[1833]
DE LTAR SNANG BA YANG GANG SNANG GI CHA THAMS CAD NAS SNANG BA LTAR DU YOD PAS STONG YANG, RANG GI RGYUS BSKYED PA DANG RANG GIS ‘BRAS BU BSKYED PA MI ‘GAL BAR SGRUB PA YIN TE,

And even though the blue does appear this way, it is empty of actually being the way that it appears to be, in all of its various parts making such an appearance.  Nonetheless, we have shown how it is no contradiction here to go further and say it has been produced by its causes; and is in turn producing its own results.


[1834]
BYAD BZHIN KYI GZUGS BRNYAN LA DER GANG SNANG GI CHA THAMS CAD NAS SNANG BA LTAR DU MED KYANG GZUGS BRNYAN MED PAR MI ‘GRO BA CIG ‘JOG SHES NA, SNGON PO LA YANG RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PAR SNANG BA’I CHA THAMS CAD NAS SNANG BA LTAR GYI DON DU MED KYANG, SNGON PO YOD PAR NGES PAR ‘JOG NUS PA CIG ‘ONG NGO,,

The reflection of an object in the mirror is not something which exists in the way it appears, in each and every one of the parts of it which appear to actually be that object.  But this in no way requires us to say that there is no reflection there at all.  If we understand how we can say all this, then in the case of the color blue as well we can say that it does not, in reality, exist in the way that it appears to exist, in any single one of the multiple parts of it which appear to exist by definition.  At the same time though, there certainly does exist a color blue there; and we can in this way learn to establish that fact, with complete certainty.


[1835]
ZHIB MO’I BLOS GZUGS SOGS KYI STENG NAS ‘DI ‘GOG ‘DI MI ‘GOG CES PA’I RNAM PA GNYIS GZUGS BRNYAN GYI DPE STENG NAS PHYED PA NI, DBU MA’I LTA BA SNYED PA LA MED MI RUNG DU DGOS PAS TSIM SLA MI NYAN NO,,

And so we make distinctions here based upon the example of a reflection in the mirror, where with delicate mental distinctions we say—with reference to visible form and the like—that this thing is something we are refusing; but that other thing is not something that we are refusing.  This kind of work is something that you actually cannot do without, in your search for the viewpoint of the middle way.  As such, I urge you not to listen to people who buy easy explanations.


[1836]
DES NA ‘GREL PA LAS KYANG GZUGS BRNYAN RANG BZHIN MED PA’I RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU RNAM PAR BZHAG PA YANG, SHES BZHIN DU MKHAS PA SU ZHIG GZUGS DANG TSOR BA LA SOGS PA RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU LAS THA DAD PA MED PAR GNAS PA RNAMS YOD PA TZAM ZHIG TU DMIGS PAS, RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PA NGES PAR BYED, DE’I PHYIR YOD PAR DMIGS KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED DO,

Thus it is too that the autcommentary says,

We can use a reflection in the mirror to describe cause & effect which have no nature of their own.  Wise ones who are keeping their wits about them though observe that things like physical form and feelings exist in a way where they are in no way divorced from the principles of cause & effect—although they might simply appear to be, and thus certainly be thought to exist through some nature of their own.  As such, the wise perceive these things as existing, but not as having grown through some nature of their own.


[1837]
ZHES [f. 137b] YOD TZAM DANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA DANG, SNGAR SKYE BAR BSTAN LA ‘DIR RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PAR BSTAN PAS, SKYE BA DANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA GNYIS SO SOR ‘BYED PA SHIN TU GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that things do, simply, exist; but have no existence through any nature of their own; and that things which we said earlier to grow, do not however grow through any nature of their own.  As such there is being described here—extremely clearly—the idea that we need to learn to distinguish between these two ideas: of things growing, and of things growing through some nature of their own.


[1838]
DE DAG MA PHYED NA DNGOS PO YOD PHYIN CHAD RANG GI NGO BOS YOD PA DANG, RANG GI NGO BOS MED PHYIN CHAD YE MED DU SONG NAS SGRO ‘DOGS DANG SKUR ‘DEBS KYI MTHA’ GNYIS LAS MI ‘DA’ STE,

If we fail to make such a distinction, then we would have to say that—once an entity exists—then it would have to exist through some essence of its own.  And we would have to say as well that—once an object did not exist through any essence of its own—then it could not exist at all.  That is, we could never get beyond the two extremes of overrating the relative existence of a thing, and underrating the same thing.


[1839]
BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, DNGOS PO DNGOS PO YOD PAR SMRA BA’I LTAR NA NI JI SRID DU DNGOS PO DE’I YOD PA NYID YIN PA DE SRID DU, DE LTAR RANG GI NGO BO YANG YIN PA NYID LA, GANG GI TSE RANG GI NGO BO DANG BRAL BA DE’I TSE DE LA DNGOS PO DE RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MED PA’I PHYIR, BONG BU’I RVA DANG ‘DRA BAS GNYIS SU SMRA BA LAS MA ‘DAS PA’I PHYIR, ‘DI’I MNGON PAR ‘DOD PA THAMS CAD ‘GRIG DKA’ BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES SO,,

The commentary to The Hundred puts it this way—

According to those who say that things exist, the essential nature of a thing is also there, just as long as the existence of that same thing is there; and at any point where that same thing loses its essential nature, then the thing itself can no longer exist in any form at all: it becomes the exact equivalent of a rabbit horn.  As long as they think this way, then these people are never anything more than those who assert a discrepancy.  As such, it is quite difficult to reconcile all the beliefs that people like this hold.


[1840]
DES NA RANG GI NGO BOS MED PAS YOD MTHA’ THAMS CAD DANG, DE NYID LA RANG BZHIN MED PA’I RGYU ‘BRAS ‘JOG NUS PAS MED MTHA’ THAMS CAD LAS GROL BA NI SLOB DPON SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS DANG ZLA BA’I ZHABS KYIS ‘PHAGS PA’I DGONGS PA BKRAL BA’I KHYAD CHOS SU SNANG BAS, YOD PA GNYIS DANG MED PA GNYIS PHYED PA SHIN TU GAL CHE’O,,

As such, a position where we can avoid every form of the extreme of things existing, because they can never exist through any nature of their own; and where at the same time we can avoid every form of the extreme of things not existing, because we are unable to posit cause & effect with no nature of its own, in the true way of things; would appear to be a unique feature of the way in which Master Buddha Palita, and the honored Chandrakirti, have interpreted the true thought of the Realized One.  As such, it is crucial that we learn to distinguish between two forms of existing, and two forms of not existing.


[1841]
GZUGS BRNYAN GYI DPES GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA NI, YAB SRAS MJAL BA LAS,
,ME LONG SHIN TU YONGS DAG LA,
,JI LTAR RANG BZHIN MED PA YI,
,GZUGS BRNYAN SNANG BA DE BZHIN DU,
,LJON PA CHOS RNAMS SHES [f. 138a] PAR GYIS,
ZHES GSUNGS TE,

Establishing all these points with the example of the reflection of something in a mirror hearkens back to the sutra called The Meeting of the Father & Son:

You should understand
Trees and the rest of things

As being like the reflection
Of something in a mirror
Which is crystal clear:

They have no nature
Of their own.


[1842]
BRDZUN PA’I DPE GZHAN RNAMS KYI DPE DON SBYOR TSUL YANG SNGAR BZHIN DU SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

You can understand other examples of falseness by applying the relevant metaphors and their referents as we have done up to here.



Easily escaping extremes

[1843]
,LNGA PA LA GNYIS, RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BA SPANG SLA BA’I YON TAN DANG, LAS ‘BRAS KYI ‘BREL BA CHES ‘THAD PA’I YON TAN NO,,

Here is our fifth point from above, where we demonstrate the advantages of denying that things could grow through any nature of their own, relative to both forms of reality.  This we present in two points, describing first the advantage that both the views that things could never change, or that they could simply discontinue, are thus easily prevented; and then secondly the advantage of showing that the connection between karma and its consequences is eminently correct.


[1844]
DANG PO NI,

Here then is the first.


	[1845]
	[VI.38b]
,DE DAG RTAG PA MA YIN CHAD PA’ANG MIN,

These things
Neither last forever
Nor simply discontinue.


[1846]
GANG GI PHYIR DNGOS PO THAMS CAD GZUGS BRNYAN LTAR RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAS STONG PA DE NYID KYI PHYIR, DON DAM PA DANG KUN RDZOB BDEN PA GNYIS SU’AM GNYIS CAR DU’ANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA’I PHYIR, GZUGS SOGS DE DAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RTAG PA MA YIN LA, DER MA ZAD CHAD PA’ANG MIN TE, CHAD PA NI MYUG TSE SA BON ZHIG PA MED PA’I SKABS SU BSHAD PA LTA BU’I CHAD PA DANG,

Due to the fact that all entities are similar to reflections in a mirror, they are empty of existing through any nature of their own.  And for this very reason, they can exist through a nature of their own neither with regard to ultimate reality, nor deceptive reality.  And this then is why these things—physical form and the rest—are neither things that could last forever, and which exist by nature; nor things that could simply discontinue, in the same way.  And when we say “discontinue” here, what we’re referring to is a kind of discontinuation such as where a seed could ever not have ended at the time of its sprout.  


[1847]
RTZA SHE LAS,
,SNGON BYUNG DA LTAR MED CES PA,
,DES NA CHAD PAR THAL BAR ‘GYUR,

As Wisdom puts it,

They say that
What happened before
Is not there now;

And for this reason
Things must have
Discontinued.


[1848]
ZHES DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHAS BLANGS PAS SNGAR YOD KYI DNGOS PO PHYIS MED PA’AM, ZHIG PA’I MI RTAG PAR ‘DOD NA’ANG CHAD LTAR ‘GYUR TE, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR KHAS LEN NA DE RTAG MI RTAG GANG DU ‘DOD KYANG, RTAG CHAD KYI MTHAR LTUNG BA’I LTA BAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What this refers to is where we accept that idea that things could exist through any nature of their own; and where something that was there before is not there afterwards—which is to say, it has stopped.  This constitutes agreeing to the thing being changing; but it amounts to things simply discontinuing.  Once you accept the idea that a thing could exist through any nature of its own, it doesn’t matter whether you assert that it’s unchanging  or changing; you are still holding a viewpoint where you have fallen into the extremes of things lasting forever, or simply discontinuing altogether.  This is what’s being said in these lines.


[1849]
‘DIR ‘GREL PAR RTZA SHE LAS, STON PAS SPRUL PA ZHIG SPRUL LA NGES KYANG GZHAN ZHIG SPRUL PA DE BZHIN DU, BYED PA PO DANG LAS DANG DES BYAS PA RNAMS KYANG DE RNAMS DANG ‘DRA BAR GSUNGS PAS, RANG BZHIN MED PA LAS RANG BZHIN MED PA RNAMS SKYE BAR BSTAN TO, ZHES [f. 138b] GSUNGS PAS NI, RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA LA BYA BYED THAMS CAD ‘JOG PAS CHAD LTA MED PAR STON PA’O,,

At this point in the autocommentary they talk about how we can ascertain that the Teacher has sent out an emanation, but then that emanation can emanate yet another.  And what it’s saying is that the agent of an action; and the action itself; and what that does are similar.  The wording here is “Things without any nature of their own grow from things with no nature of their own.”  What these words are indicating is that—in a case where we establish the working of things while nothing exists through any nature of its own—we avoid the view that things could have simply discontinued.


[1850]
‘DIR KUN RDZOB TU RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MA BKAG NA SHIN TU PHRA BA’I BDAG MED MI RTOGS PAS, SHIN TU PHRA BA’I RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BA RGYUD LA MI SKYE BA YANG BYA DKA’ BAS, RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BA MA LUS PAR SPONG BA NI, DGAG BYA DE KUN RDZOB TU BKAG PA’I YON TAN NO,,

If we are unable to disprove the idea that—from a deceptive point of view—things could ever exist through some nature of their own, then we will never grasp the extremely subtle form of the lack of self-existence.  It is an extremely difficult task to prevent the viewpoint of the extremely subtle forms of staying forever and simply discontinuing from growing within our mind; and it is one of the great features of blocking the object which we deny when we speak of no-self-nature even deceptively, when our goal is to eliminate, within ourselves, each and every case of the views that things could stay forever, or simply discontinue.


[1851]
DE KUN RDZOB TU YOD PA KHEGS NA DON DAM LA LTOS PA’I RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BAR MI LTUNG BAR MA ZAD, KUN RDZOB LA LTOS NAS RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BA’I DRI MAS MI GOS PAS NA, RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BA SPONG SLA BA’I YON TAN YOD DO,,

If we can prevent the belief that this could exist deceptively, then we will never fall into the viewpoints that things could either last forever, or simply discontinue, relative to the ultimate.  Not only that, but if we can prevent ourselves from being sullied by the stench of the viewpoint that things could either last forever or simply discontinue, relative to the deceptive, then there is the added benefit that we find in easier to eliminate, completely, these views of lasting or discontinuing.



How does karma
connect to a consequence?

[1852]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MI ‘DOD PA LA KUN GZHI SOGS KHAS BLANG MI DGOS PAR BSTAN PA DANG, LAS ‘GAGS PA LAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA’I DPE BSTAN PA DANG, DE LTAR BSTAN PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O,,

Which brings us to our second point from above: The advantage of showing that the connection between karma and its consequences is eminently correct.  Here we proceed in three steps: a demonstration that it is not the case that if we deny that things could exist through any nature of their own, we must then accept things like foundation consciousness; the presentation of a metaphor to illustrate how a karmic consequence can come from the karma itself having stopped; and then finally disproving any debate that may arise about this presentation.


[1853]
DANG PO LA GSUM, MTSAMS SBYOR GYI GZHUNG BSHAD PA DANG, RTZA BA’I TSIG DON BSHAD PA DANG, DE LAS ‘PHROS PA’I DON BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these three steps has three parts of its own: explaining that part of the text which provides a segue here; explaining the words of the root text; and explaining additional points that those issues themselves raise.  Here is the first of these.


[1854]
DE LTAR BDEN PA GNYIS GAR YANG RANG BZHIN MED PAS RTAG PA DANG CHAD PAR LTA BA RGYANG RING DU SPANGS PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, 

Not only is it the case that we are able to banish, to a great distance, the views that things could last forever or simply discontinue—for the reason that these things have no nature of their own, relative to both of the two forms of reality.  


[1855]
LAS RNAMS ‘GAGS NAS YUN RING DU LON YANG LAS RNAMS KYI ‘BRAS BU DANG ‘BREL BA NI, KUN GZHI RNAM PAR SHES PA DANG SEMS KYI RGYUN DANG CHUD MI ZA BA DANG THOB PA LA SOGS PAR YONGS SU RTOG PA MED PAR YANG ‘THAD PA YIN NO,

Even if an extended period of time has gone by after particular karmas have come to an end, they still have a connection to the results of those karmas.  And this connection is something which is correct, even without imaginary ideas about a foundation consciousness; or the flow of the mind; or the way in which nothing ever just fades away; or retainers, or others of the like.


[1856]
ZHES RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA THA SNYAD DU YANG MED PA’I PHYOGS [f. 139a] LA RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BA RGYANG RING DU BSRINGS PA’I YON TAN YOD PAR MA ZAD KUN GZHI LA SOGS PA KHAS MA BLANGS KYANG LAS ‘BRAS KYI ‘BREL BA SHIN TU ‘THAD PA’I YON TAN YOD PAR BSTAN NO,,

What this is saying is that—yes—with those who take the position that things cannot exist by definition, even nominally, there is that benefit that they are able to banish, to a great distance, the viewpoints either that things could last forever as they are, or else simply discontinue.  But that’s not all; there is also the benefit that the connection between karma and its consequences is, for them, something which is extremely correct, even if they refuse to accept concepts such as foundation consciousness, or the like.


[1857]
‘PHAGS PA’I GZHUNG ‘GREL TSUL LA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA RDUL TZAM MED KYANG, BYA BYED THAMS CAD BZHAG PAS CHOG PA’I ‘GREL TSUL GYI LUGS THUN MONG MA YIN PA ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS, RNAM PAR DAG PA’I GRUB MTHA’ ‘GREL BYED GZHAN DANG THUN MONG MA YIN PA MANG DU YOD DE,

As far as commenting upon the classic of the Realized One, this is a truly unique way of doing it; where we say that—even though there does not exist even the tiniest bit of anything which could ever exist by definition—still we can go ahead and posit the entire system in which things do what they do.  And based upon this kind of presentation, there are many other points here that are not held in common even with other commentators who belong to quite accurate schools of thought.


[1858]
DE GANG ZHE NA RE ZHIG GTZO BO RNAMS BRJOD NA, TSOGS DRUG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I KUN GZHI RNAM SHES DANG, RANG RIG ‘GOG LUGS THUN MONG MA YIN PA DANG, RANG RGYUD KYI SBYOR BAS PHYIR RGOL GYI RGYUD LA DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA SKYED PA KHAS MI LEN PA GSUM DANG,

And what are those points?  Well, if we were just to mention some of the main ones, we could point first to the three of—

	1) A foundation consciousness which was not such that
		to be it was automatically to be the group of six
		different types of consciousness;

	2) A unique way of denying apperception; and

	3) The denial that one can—with the “independent” form of
		reasoning—inspire the view of the way things really
		are, in the mind of an opponent.


[1859]
SHES PA KHAS LEN PA BZHIN DU PHYI ROL GYI DON YANG KHAS BLANG DGOS PA DANG, NYAN RANG LA DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN MED PAR RTOGS PA YOD PA DANG, CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN NYON MONGS SU ‘JOG PA DANG, ZHIG PA DNGOS PO YIN PA DANG, DE’I RGYU MTSAN GYIS DUS GSUM GYI ‘JOG TSUL THUN MONG MA YIN PA SOGS YIN NO,,

And then there are also:

	4) The fact that—just as one accepts awareness—you must also 
		accept the existence of outside objects.

	5) The idea that listeners and self-made buddhas do realize
		the fact that things have no nature of their own.

	6) The determination that the tendency to grasp to a
		self-existence of things is a negative emotion.

	7) The idea that the fact of something having ended is
		itself a functioning thing.

	8) The concept that—due to that being the case—the 
		three times can be defined in a unique way.


[1860]
DE’I DANG PO NI SKABS ‘DIR BSTAN LA, RANG RIG KHAS MI LEN PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MI ‘DOD PA LA THUG TSUL NI ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

The first of all these is presented at this juncture; and we will go on to explain how our refusal to accept apperception stems from our denial that things could exist through any nature of their own.


[1861]
RANG RGYUD MI BZHED PA DE LA THUG TSUL NI RGYAS PAR GZHAN DU BSHAD ZIN LA, MDOR BSDUS SHIG ‘DIR YANG ‘CHAD DO,,

We have already explained elsewhere, in detail, how our refusal to accept an “independent” logical statement also stems from the same thing.  But we will give just a brief recap of that here.


[1862]
PHYI ROL KHAS LEN PA ‘DI [f. 139b] LA THUG PA NI ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR LA, LNGA PA YANG ‘DI LA THUG TSUL NI SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS KYIS NYAN THOS KYI SDE SNOD LAS CHOS THAMS CAD BDAG MED DO ZHES GSUNGS PA’I MED RGYU’I BDAG NI, NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA LA BSHAD PA LTAR ‘DIR YANG BZHED DE, DE YANG BDAG MED MTSAN NYID RDZOGS PA’I DON NO,,

The way in which our accepting the existence of outside objects comes down to this is something we will be explaining.  The fifth point also comes down to this same concept; Master Buddha Palita has made that reference to “the lack of a self-nature to all things, covered in the collections of the listeners.”  The self-nature lacking here is explained as referring to things existing through some essence of their own; and that idea is accepted here as well.  This is moreover the point of saying that things have no self-nature; it describes this concept definitively.


[1863]
DE’I PHYIR GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MTSAN NYID RDZOGS PA YANG GANG ZAG RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PA LA BYA DGOS LA, DE JI BZHIN DU RTOGS PA LA NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED JI BZHIN PA YANG RTOGS DGOS PA’I GNAD DO,,

Therefore when you describe the lack of a self-nature to the person in its definitive form, you have to tie it to how the person cannot exist through any essential nature of their own.  And the crucial point here is that you have to understand how to describe the lack of a self-nature to things in the same way that you have grasped that other fact.


[1864]
DE LTA YIN NA CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN NYON MONGS SU NGES PAR ‘DOD DGOS PAS NYON MONGS KYI NGOS ‘DZIN LA PHRA RAGS GNYIS DANG, MI RTAG SOGS BCU DRUG GI LAM TZAM GYIS GROL MI GROL GYI ‘DOD TSUL GNYIS DANG, SHES SGRIB MTSAMS GANG NAS SPONG BA MI ‘DRA BA SOGS KYI KHYAD PAR MANG PO ZHIG YOD DO,,

Since that’s the case, we most certainly have to accept the tendency to believe in a self-nature to things as being a negative emotion; and this means that there are relatively more subtle, and relatively less subtle, ways of identifying just what a negative emotion is.  There are quite a few distinctions to be drawn here; such as two different opinions about whether or not a person can be liberated solely through the path of the 16 aspects of impermanence and the rest, and different ideas about the point at which we are able to eliminate obstacles to omniscience.


[1865]
‘O NA DANG POR THEG CHEN DU ZHUGS PA’I DE KHO NA NYID KYI LTA BA LEGS PAR GTAN LA PHEBS PA ZHIG DANG, NYAN RANG DU LHUNG PA GNYIS GZHI MTHUN SRID PA NI DBU MA PA GNYIS KAS KYANG ‘DOD DGOS LA, DE LTA NA DE ‘DRA BA DES CHOS KYI BDAG MED BSGOMS PAS MNGON SUM DU ‘GYUR BA DANG, DE LTAR MTHONG ZIN GOMS BAR BYED PA CIG KYANG ‘DOD DGOS SO,,

But first of all here we can say that we need to describe, accurately, how both of the groups within the school of the Middle Way would have to agree to the concept of one person who had just entered the greater way—and succeeded in establishing, accurately, the view of suchness—who at the same time could conceivably drop into the ways of the listeners, or the self-made buddhas.  And they would have to agree that, in such a circumstance, the person who had done so could have a direct experience—since they had been meditating on the lack of a self-nature to things; and they could as well undertake to accustom themselves to what they had finished seeing.


[1866]
DE LTA NA LAM DES CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN KUN BRTAGS MTHONG LAM NAS SPONG BA DANG, BDAG ‘DZIN DE LHAN SKYES, DE’I SGOM LAM NAS KYANG SPONG BA ‘DOD DGOS [f. 140a] PAS, DNGOS PO RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I DBU MA PA’I LUGS LA YANG CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN LA NYON MONGS CAN YIN MIN GNYIS ‘DOD DAM SNYAM NA,

One might wonder about something here.  In such a case, we would have to agree that a person could use this particular path to eliminate the learned form of grasping to a self-nature to things at the point of the path of seeing; and then could eliminate the innate form of grasping to this self-nature at the point of the path of habituation.  Wouldn’t it then be the case that—in systems of the Middle Way which hold that functional things exist by definition, as well—there would be both a belief that the tendency to hold to a self-nature of things was wrapped up with negative thoughts, and a belief that it was not?


[1867]
‘DI LA GSAL BAR BSHAD PA MI SNANG YANG, RANG RGYUD PA DE DAG GIS NYAN RANG LAM DE LTAR SGOM PA LA, CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN MNGON GYUR RE ZHIG SPANGS PA ‘ONG YANG, TSOGS MTHA’ YAS PA BSAGS PA’I GROGS MED PAR CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS PO GANG GI YANG SA BON SPANGS PA MI ‘ONG ZHES BZHED DGOS PAS, SHES SGRIB MNGON GYUR BA RE ZHIG LA SPANGS PA NYAN RANG LA SRID KYANG, SA BON SPANGS PA MI SRID PAR SMRA DGOS SO,,

I haven’t observed a clear explanation of this point; but we can say that those who belong to the Independent group would have to agree that—if a person were to meditate in this way upon the paths of the listener or self-made buddha—then they would come to eliminate, for the time being, the manifest form of the tendency to hold to a self-nature to things.  But they would also have to say that—without the additional assistance provided by accumulating unlimited masses of good karma—it is an impossibility that they could ever eliminate the seeds of either one of the two forms of the tendency to grasp to a self-nature of things.  As such, one would have to declare that—even though it was possible for listeners and self-made buddhas to eliminate manifest forms of obstacles to omniscience for the time being—it would be impossible for them to have eliminated the seeds themselves.


[1868]
SLOB DPON ‘DI’I BZHED PAS NI CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN NYON MONGS YIN PAS, DE’I SA BON SPANGS PA LA TSOGS MTHA’ YAS PA GSOG PA’I GROGS MI DGOS LA, GNYIS SNANG ‘KHRUL PA’I BAG CHAGS KYI SHES SGRIB SBYONG BA LA NI, GROGS DE LTA BU MED PAR SBYONG MI NUS PAR BZHED DO,,

The position taken by the current master is that the tendency to grasp to a self-nature to things is a negative emotion; and as such, it is not necessary—if we seek to eliminate the seeds for this tendency—to have the additional help offered by accumulating unlimited masses of good karma.  This master would though say that—if we seek to clean ourselves of obstacles to omniscience in the form of deep seeds causing a mistake in the form of the discrepancy—we could not successfully accomplish this purification without just such additional assistance.


[1869]
SNGAR BSHAD PA DE DAG GI GO BA CHAGS NA KHYAD SHIN TU CHE BAR SNANG BAS BSHAD DO,,

I have taken the time here to go through the explanations you see just up to this point because it seems to me that they can make a very big difference in getting a clear understanding of these points.



The root text on how karma
connects to consequence

[1870]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to the second part we promised above: explaining the words of the root text on these particular points.


[1871]
DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYOGS LA, KUN GZHI SOGS KHAS MA BLANGS KYANG LAS ‘BRAS KYI ‘BREL PA ‘THAD TSUL JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

One may begin with the following question:

Just how is it—in the case of those who assert that there is nothing at all which exists through any nature of its own—that we can we can say that the connection between karma and its consequences is all perfectly acceptable, even without accepting concepts such as foundation consciousness?


[1872]
LAS DANG DE’I ‘BRAS BU’I BAR DU YUN RING POR CHOD PA’I DGE MI DGE’I LAS LAS KYANG, BDE BA DANG SDUG BSNGAL SOGS KYI ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA NI RANG GI SDE PA GONG ‘OG THAMS CAD ‘DOD LA, DE [f. 140b] LA LAS DE ‘BRAS BU ‘BYIN PA’I SNGA LOGS BAR DU GNAS NA NI RTAG PAR ‘GYUR LA, RTAG PAS DON BYED PAR MI NUS PAS LAS LAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA’I ‘BREL PA MI ‘THAD DO,,

The fact is that something is going on between an action and the consequences of that action; which is to say—according to all Buddhist schools, be they higher or lower ones—a person can commit a good or bad deed, and then the result of pleasure or pain and the like can come back to them, even in a case where an extended period of time has passed between this karma and its consequence.  But if, in such a circumstance, the karma somehow remains somewhere during the interim—up to the point at which it gives forth its consequence—then that karma would have to be an unchanging entity.  We all know though that an unchanging entity is incapable of performing a function; as such, the supposed connection between karma and its consequences is an untenable concept.


[1873]
LAS DE BYAS PA’I SKAD CIG GNYIS PAR ZHIG NA NI, MTSAMS DE NAS ‘BRAS BU DNGOS SU ‘BYIN PA’I SNGA LOGS KYI BAR DU LAS DE MED LA, LAS ZHIG PA YANG DNGOS POR MED PAS LAS LAS ‘BRAS BU JI LTAR ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR ZHES BRTZAD PA’I

Someone might then come and make the following argument:

And suppose, rather, that this karma—in the second instant of committing it—comes to a stop.  From this juncture, up to the moment before the karma gives forth its consequence, the karma would not have existed.  And a karma which has already stopped could never exist as a functioning thing; how then could the karma give forth its result?


[1874]
LAN DU, LAS BYAS PA’I SKAD CIG GNYIS PAR ‘GAGS ZIN PA’I SNGA LOGS KYI LAS ‘GAG PA LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PA’I TSE, LAS KYI NUS PA GZHAG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR KHA CIG KUN GZHI RNAM PAR SHES PA RTOG PAR BYED LA, KHA CIG BU LON GYI DBANG RGYA STE DE’I YI GE DANG ‘DRA BA’I LAS GNYIS LAS DON GZHAN PA, CHUD MI ZA BA ZHES PA LDAN MIN ‘DU BYED DU GYUR PA CIG ‘DOD DO,,

In response to this, some people point to the karma which is approaching stopping: that karma just previous to the point at which the karma has stopped, in the second instant of the commission of the karma.  In this moment, they say, there must be a place where the potential of the karma is deposited; and so it is that some people imagine that there must be a type of awareness known as “foundation consciousness.”  And there are also some who say that there is some other entity, distinct from the two karmas, similar to a letter of credit or receipt for a loan; something—a separate changing entity that is neither physical nor mental—which consists of the fact that the karma will never just fade away.


[1875]
KHA CIG NI LAS GNYIS KYI THOB PA ZHES PA DE GNYIS LAS DON GZHAN DU GYUR PA’I LDAN MIN ZHIG RTOG PAR BYED DO,,

Some other people talk about the “retention for the two karmas,” which they imagine to consist of a changing entity which is neither physical nor mental, and which enjoys an existence of its own, apart from the two.


[1876]
KHA CIG NI LAS KYI BAG CHAGS KYIS BSGOS PA’I RNAM SHES KYI RGYUN RTOG PAR BYED LA, DE’I PHYIR LAS ‘GAGS KYANG LAS KYIS PHYIS YUN RING PO NAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYIN PA MI ‘GAL PAR ‘DOD DE, LAS KYIS KUN GZHI LA BAG CHAGS ‘JOG PAS BAG CHAGS DE LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU YIN LA, DE’I RIGS ‘DRA BRGYUD PAS MTHAR ‘BRAS BU ‘BYIN PAS DANG PO’I LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU BRGYUD PA LAS ‘BYUNG BAR ‘DOD PA’O,,

Others have an idea about a stream of awareness which is imbued by the deep seed of the karma; as such, they say, there is no contradiction incurred by when we say that a karma gives forth a consequence much, much later, even though the karma itself has stopped.  That is, the karma deposits a deep seed in the foundation consciousness; and thus the consequence of the karmic action is that very deep seed.  The stream of similar cases of the gives forth, finally, a result.  And thus, they believe, the consequence of the original karma is produced from the continuation.


[1877]
DE BZHIN DU GZHAN GSUM LA YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And then we can understand the other three cases in a similar way.


[1878]
DE’I DANG PO NI SEMS [f. 141a] TZAM PA ‘GA’ ZHIG GO ,GNYIS PA NI BYE BRAG TU SMRA BA YIN PAR SPYAN RAS GZIGS BRTUL ZHUGS KYIS BSHAD DE, KHA CHE BYE BRAG TU SMRA BA LAS GZHAN PA ZHIG GO ,GSUM PA YANG BYE BRAG TU SMRA BA’I NANG TSAN GCIG GO ,BZHI PA LA GSAL KHA MA BYUNG YANG MDZOD ‘GREL GYI GNAS DGU PA DANG BSTUN NA MDO SDE PA DANG KHA CHE BYE BRAG TU SMRA BA’I YANG ‘DOD PA YIN PA ‘DRA’O,,

The first of these three is a position of a number of followers of the Mind Only school.  The second is described by Master Avalokita Vrata as belonging to members of the Detailist school: “It is a group within the Detailists different from the Kashmiris.”  The third also belongs to a particular group within the Detailist school.  As for the fourth, the case is not exactly clear; but since it accords with the ninth chapter of the autocommentary to the Treasure House of Higher Knowledge, it would seem to be a belief of the Sutrists, in addition to the Kashmiri section within the Detailists.


[1879]
KHA CHE BAS THOB PA KHAS LEN KYANG THOB BYA’I CHOS LAS GNYIS KYIS THOB PA SKYED PAR MI ‘DOD LA ‘DIR NI DE LTAR ‘DOD PA CIG STE GANG GI LTAR NA ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

What this is saying is that “The Kashmiris accept the idea of a retention; but they do not accept that the retention can be created by that which is retained: by the two kinds of karma.  And so we can describe them as ‘having the single belief’—and this then is the reason.”


	[1880]
[VI.39]
Yasmāt svarūpeṇa na tan niruddhaṃ
ciraṃ niruddhād api karmaṇo’taḥ,
Kvacid vinaivālayam asya śakteḥ
phalaṃ samutpadyata ityavaihi.

,GANG PHYIR RANG BZHIN GYIS DE MI ‘GAG PA,
,DE PHYIR KUN GZHI MED KYANG ‘DI NUS PHYIR,
,LA LAR LAS ‘GAGS YUN RING LON LAS KYANG,
,’BRAS BU YANG DAG ‘BYUNG BAR RIG PAR GYIS,

	For this reason,
	Neither does it stop
	Through any nature
	Of its own.

	As such, it has
The power for this,
Even refusing
A foundation consciousness.

In particular ones,
Karma can stop,
And a very long time
Can pass; but even then,

You should understand,
The exact consequence
Will be given forth.


[1881]
DBU MA THAL ‘GYUR BA GANG GI LTAR NA, LAS RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS MA SKYES PA DE’I LTAR NA NI, GANG GI PHYIR LAS DE RANG BZHIN GYIS TE MI ‘GAG PA RANG BZHIN GYIS MA ‘GAGS PA LAS KYANG ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA MI ‘GAL BA DE’I PHYIR KUN GZHI SOGS KHAS MA BLANGS KYANG, LAS LAS ‘BRAS BU ‘DI ‘BYUNG BAR NUS PA’I PHYIR,

According to those who belong to the Consequence group within the Middle Way school, karma cannot start by itself.  Due to that—for this same reason—neither can it stop through any nature of its own.  But even though it does not stop through any nature of its own, it’s no contradiction to say that a consequence can be given forth by it.  As such, the karma does indeed have the power to give forth this consequence, even if we refuse to accept that there is a foundation consciousness, or anything of the like.


[1882]
SEMS CAN GYI RGYUD LA LAR LAS GNYIS BYAS PA ‘GAGS NAS YUN RING PO BSKAL PA MANG PO LON PA LAS KYANG, LAS LAS ‘BRAS BU YANG DAG PA STE RGYU LA ‘BRAS BU MI ‘KHRUL BAR ‘BYUNG BAR RIG PAR GYIS SHIG ,DE LTAR NA PHYOGS ‘DI LA NI LAS DANG ‘BRAS BU’I ‘BREL PA CHES SHIN TU ‘THAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

In the minds of particular living beings then, the two kinds of karma can be committed, and stop; and then a very long time—even many eons—can pass.  But even then, you should understand, the exact consequence will be given forth from the karma: which is to say, the result will come unerringly from its cause.  As such, the whole idea of a connection between karma and its consequences is—in this particular way of thinking—something which is entirely correct.


[1883]
DE RNAMS KYI DON NI SNGAR BZHIN BRTZAD PA’I LAN SMRA BA PO BZHI GAS KYANG, LAS LA SKYE BA DANG ‘GAG PA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA KHAS LEN ZHING, LAS BYAS PA’I ‘OG TU ‘GAGS PA DE RANG [f. 141b] BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR ‘DOD DO,,

The import of all these points is to provide an answer to the arguments presented earlier, as all four presenters here accept the idea that karma can start & stop, by definition; and that when karma stops after we have committed it, this is something which occurs by nature.


[1884]
DE LA SLOB DPON ‘DIS DE ‘DRA BA’I ‘GAGS PA YIN KYANG KUN GZHI SOGS KHAS LEN PAS SKYON MED CES LAN ‘DEBS PA MI RIGS TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I TSUL GYIS LAS SKYE BA DANG ‘GAGS PA MED PA’I PHYIR RO ZHES ‘GOG PA YIN NO,,

And what this master is saying here is that it would be wrong to reply, at this point, that—even though it is true that the stopping of the karma is happening the way it was described—nonetheless there is no problem, since we accept concepts such as foundation consciousness and the like.  That is, he is denying that there could exist any such thing as karma starting and stopping in a way where things existed through some nature of their own. 


[1885]
LAN ‘DEBS TSUL DE NYID ‘PHAGS PA’I BZHED PA YIN PAR STON PA LA,
,GANG PHYIR LAS NI SKYE BA MED,
,’DI LTAR RANG BZHIN MED DE’I PHYIR,
,GANG PHYIR DE NI MA SKYES PA,
,DE PHYIR CHUD ZAR MI ‘GYUR RO,
ZHES RTZA SHER GSUNGS PA DRANGS TE, LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA’I PHYIR RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS SKYE BA MED DO,,

In order to show that this exact way of responding reflects the viewpoint of the Realized One, our master at this point cites the following lines from Wisdom:

Karma never starts;
And for this reason,
It has, as we have seen,
No nature of its own.

And for the reason too
That it never started,
It can never be that it
Simply fades away.

What this is saying is that—because there is no such thing as karma which exists through some nature of its own—there is no such thing as karma which starts in and of itself.


[1886]
DE’I PHYIR LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS ‘GAG PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR, LAS BYAS PA’I ‘OG TU ‘GAGS PA DE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR BZUNG NAS CHUD MI ZA BAR RTOG PA RIGS PA MIN NO, ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

As such—for the reason that it is impossible for karma to come to a stop through some nature of its own—what’s being said here is that it’s illogical to imagine that karma never just fades away, if you are still holding that the stopping of karma subsequent to its commission is something that does exist through some nature of its own.


[1887]
RIGS PA DE NI CHUD MI ZA BA ‘GOG PA LA GSUNGS KYANG GZHAN GSUM ‘GOG PA LA YANG KHYAD PAR MED DE RGYU MTSAN KUN NAS MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

With this particular line of reasoning, they refer to “stopping where it doesn’t just fade away”; but the stopping in the case of the other three too isn’t any different—since the reason is exactly the same.


[1888]
YANG MDO LAS,
,MI YI TSE TSAD LO BRGYA STE,
,DE SRID ‘TSO ZHES BRJOD MOD KYI,
,LO LA PHUNG POR SPUNGS PA MED,
,SGRUB PA DE YANG DE DANG MTSUNGS,

,ZAD PA MED CES GANG SMRAS DANG,
,LAS ZAD CES NI GANG SMRAS PA,
,STONG PA’I TSUL DU ZAD PA MED,
,THA SNYAD TSUL DU ZAD PAR BSTAN,

We can quote the following sutra—

The span of a human life
May be a hundred years,
And people may talk about
Staying alive for that long;

But years are not things
That you can pile upon each other;
And doing practice
Is something the same as that.

When it was said that
There was no ending,
And when they said
That karma did end,

It was in the sense of emptiness
That there was no ending;
And in the sense of expression
That things were said to end.


[1889]
ZHES GSUNGS PA DRANGS TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I ZAD PA’AM ‘GAG PA MED PA DANG, DE GNYIS THA SNYAD KYI DBANG GIS BZHAG PA’I KHUNGS SO,,

This is a source for saying that there is no such thing as an ending, or a stopping, which could exist through any nature of its own; and for saying that these two are established nominally.


[1890]
NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS,
,LO RNAMS [f. 142a] PHUNG POR SPUNGS PA NI,
,MED PA DE BZHIN YANG DAG PAR,
,TSOGS PA ‘DI YANG BLTA BAR BYA,
ZHES ‘BYUNG NGO,,

Naktso’s translation of the same sutra reads—

There is no such thing
As piling the years
One on top the other;

And a person should view
Any kind of perfect collection
As being the same.


[1891]
DE RNAMS NI RANG BZHIN GYIS TE MI ‘GAG PA ZHES DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA’I STENG NAS BSHAD PA’O,,

When these deny that things could stop through some nature of their own, they are speaking with reference to predicating the object which emptiness is empty of.



A reason not to accept
foundation consciousness

[1892]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, ‘GAG PA RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PA KUN GZHI KHAS MI LEN PA’I RGYU MTSAN DU ‘GRO TSUL DANG, KUN GZHI KHAS MI LEN KYANG BAG CHAGS KYI GZHI ‘JOG PA’O,,

This brings us to our third step: explaining additional points that the issues we’ve discussed here raise, themselves.  We proceed in two sections—the way in which the fact that the stopping here does not exist through any nature of its own can actually end up serving as a reason not to accept the concept of foundation consciousness; and the how to posit a foundation for deep seeds even if we don’t accept foundation consciousness.


[1893]
DANG PO NI, GAL TE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I ‘GAG PA MED KYANG RANG GI LUGS LA YANG LA LAR LAS ‘GAGS ZHES DANG, ‘GAGS SHING RANG BZHIN YOD MIN PA’I, ZHES GSUNGS PAS, THA SNYAD TSUL DU ZAD PAR BSTAN, ZHES PA LTAR

Here is the first.  One may begin with the following question—

Now in your presentation, you say that even though there is no such thing as the karma stopping through some nature of its own, nonetheless “In particular ones, karma can stop,” and one “which is not something that exists with any nature of its own can stop.”  And thus you have quoted “In the sense of expression, things were said to end.”


[1894]
LAS BYAS PA’I ‘OG TU LAS DE ‘GAGS PA NI ‘DOD DGOS LA, DE’I TSE ‘GAGS PA NI DNGOS POR MED CING LAS ‘BRAS KYI ‘BREL PA’I RTEN DU KUN GZHI SOGS KYANG MI ‘DOD NA,

In the end though you would have to agree that a particular karma ends subsequent to the commission of that karma.  And at that point, the stopping does not exist as an entity; but still you refuse to accept ideas like that of a foundation consciousness which could act as the basis for a connection between the karma and its consequence.


[1895]
LAS ‘GAGS NAS YUN RING DU LON PA LAS, ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA MI ‘THAD PAR BRTZAD PA SON {%SO NA} GNAS PAS, SNGAR GYI LAN DE DAG GIS MI CHOG GO ZHE NA,

As such, our original argument that it would be wrong then to say that a consequence could be put forth a long time after the karma had already stopped remains a valid one.  So too we can say that your replies thus far are not sufficient.


[1896]
SKYON MED DE, GANG PHYIR RANG BZHIN GYIS DE MI ‘GAG PA, DE PHYIR ZHES PA’I RGYU MTSAN NYID KYIS LAS ZHIG PA’I ZHIG PA LAS PHYIS KYI ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA ‘GRUB PAS LAN ZUR PA MA GSUNGS SO,,

And yet there is no such problem.  Remember, “For the reason that it never stopped through any nature of its own; and for that reason too.”  This is expressing the very reason why we can say that—from the stopping of a karma which has stopped—a later result can be given forth; as such, no further, separate reason is offered.


[1897]
DE YANG DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYOGS THAMS CAD LA, ZHIG PA DNGOS POR MI RUNG LA RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PAR ‘DOD PA’I DBU MA’I PHYOGS LA ZHIG PA DNGOS [f. 142b] POR GRUB PA’I GNAD DO,,

Beyond that—according to the views of all those groups which accept the idea that a functional object could exist through some nature of its own—it would be incorrect to say that the stopping could itself be a functional thing; whereas according to the views of the followers of the Middle Way school, the stopping itself is proved to be a functional thing.  This is the crucial point here.


[1898]
LUGS DANG PO LA NI, MYU GU LTA BU’I DNGOS PO CIG ZHIG PA NA, MYU GU’I CHA SHAS KYI DNGOS PO THAMS CAD NI LOG LA, MYU GU LAS GZHAN PA BUM PA LA SOGS PA’I DNGOS PO GZHAN GANG YANG MA THOB PAS, ZHIG PA DE DNGOS PO GTAN MIN PAR ‘DOD DE, SNGON PO LA SOGS PA SKYE MCHED RE RE BA’I DNGOS PO DANG, BUM PA LA SOGS PA RANG GI CHA SHAS KYI DNGOS PO TSOGS PA GANG YANG ZHIG PA DE’I MTSAN GZHIR MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR DNGOS PO MIN NO SNYAM PA’O,,

According to the first of these two positions, when a functional thing like a sprout comes to an end, all the functional entities which constitute component parts of the sprout are cancelled.  At the same time, no entity other than the sprout—nothing like a water pitcher or the like—is thus actualized; and, as such, they have to say that there cannot be the slightest functional thing left here.  What they are thinking is that there is nothing at all that would be fitting to point to as a classical example of this kind of stopping—neither the functional things represented by the individual doors of sense such as blue or the like; nor functioning things which are conglomerates of their components, as in the case of pitchers or the like.  As such, they would say, the stopping could never itself be a functional thing.


[1899]
LUGS PHYI MA LA NI, DPER NA NYER SBAS KYI PHUNG PO LNGA RE RE BA DANG TSOGS PA GNYIS KA DANG, DE GNYIS LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA GCIG NYER SBAS KYI MTSAN GZHIR ‘JOG RGYU MED CING, NYER SBAS KYANG DE GSUM GYI MTSAN GZHIR MI RUNG LA, RANG GI PHUNG PO LA BRTEN NAS NYER SBAS SU BTAGS PA DNGOS PO YIN PAR MI ‘GAL BA BZHIN DU, ZHIG PA YANG ZHIG RGYU’I DNGOS PO DANG, DE DANG RIGS MTHUN PA’I DNGOS PO GANG YANG MTSAN GZHIR MED KYANG, ZHIG RGYU’I DNGOS PO LA BRTEN NAS SKYES PA’I PHYIR DNGOS PO’O,,

Now let’s consider the latter of the two positions.  They would say that—as an illustration—we cannot find any classical example of something that we point to as being Mary, neither in any one of the five individual parts that make her up, or in the combination of these five; nor in any one thing which is essentially distinct from these two.  And they would say that there is no contradiction in saying that Mary as something ascribed to her component parts is itself a functional thing.  Similarly, they would say, there is a stopping which arises based on the entity which is to stop—despite the fact that neither the functional entity to stop, nor any functional entity of the same type as it, can be pointed to as the stopping itself.  As such, they say, we can say that the stopping is itself a functional thing.


[1900]
DE SGRUB PA LA LUNG RIGS GNYIS TSIG GSAL LAS GSUNGS PA’I DANG PO NI,

A Clarification of the Verses presents both scriptural reasoning and logical support which corroborate this position; let’s speak about the first.


[1901]
SA BCU PA LAS, SKYE BA’I RKYEN GYIS RGA SHI ZHES GSUNGS PA STE, SHI BA NI GANG SHI BA’I SEMS CAN DE ZHIG PA YIN LA, DE SKYE BA’I RKYEN GYIS SKYED PAR GSUNGS PA DANG,

Ten Levels speaks of “aging & death, due to the factor of birth.”  Death here refers to the stopping of the living being who dies; and what this is saying is that this happens due to the factor of being born.


[1902]
YANG DE NYID LAS ‘CHI BA YANG BYA BA GNYIS SU NYE BAR GNAS PA YIN TE ‘DU BYED ‘JIG PAR YANG BYED PA DANG, YONGS SU MI SHES PA RGYUN MI ‘CHAD PA’I RGYU YANG ‘BYIN PA’O,

The same teaching describes how “Death consists of the proximity of two conditions: the creation of the destruction of factors; and the failure to shut off the flow of total misunderstanding—these causes will bring it forth.”


[1903]
ZHES ‘CHI BAS BYA BA GNYIS [f. 143a] BYED PAR GSUNGS TE, SHI BA RGYUS BYED PA DANG, SHI BAS MA RIG PA SKYED PAR YANG GSUNGS PAS, ZHIG PA LA SKYED PA’I RGYU YOD PA DANG, ZHIG PAS ‘BRAS BU SKYED NUS PA YIN TE,

What this is saying is that death performs two functions: it’s expressing the idea that death is accomplished by a cause; and that, furthermore, death triggers misunderstanding.  And what this is saying is that there does exist such a thing as a cause which triggers a stopping; and furthermore that a stopping has the ability to trigger a result.


[1904]
‘DI NI RGYUN GYI ZHIG PA YIN YANG SKAD CIG MA DANG PO DUS GNYIS PAR ZHIG PA LA YANG ‘DRA LA, SKAD CIG MA DANG PO DUS GNYIS PAR ZHIG PA’I RGYUR YANG BSTAN NO,,

All this refers to the stopping of a flow; but still we would have to say that the stopping of the first instant in the second instant of time is the same.  It is, at the same time, indicating that this is a cause for the stopping of the first instant at the second point in time.


[1905]
DES NA SEMS CAN SKYES PA DANG SHI BA GNYIS DANG SKAD CIG MA GNYIS PAR MI SDOD PA DANG, SKAD CIG MA GNYIS PAR MA BSDAD PA RNAMS LA DNGOS POR ‘JOG MI ‘JOG DANG, RGYUS SKYED MI SKYED KUN NAS MTSUNGS SO,,

Thus we can say that these questions are all the same: that is, whether we can say that the pair of living beings having taken birth, or dying; and things failing to remain into their second instant; and the failing itself to remain in the second instant—whether we can say that these themselves are functional entities, or not; and whether they have been generated by causes, or not.


[1906]
‘DI LA DGONGS NAS RTZA SHE LAS, DNGOS DANG DNGOS MED ‘DUS BYAS YIN, ZHES DANG,

It’s with these questions in mind that Wisdom includes that line about how “Those things that are actual, and those that are not, are all products.”


[1907]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LAS KYANG,
,RGYU ZAD NYID LAS ZHI BA NI,
,ZAD CES BYA BAR DMIGS PA STE,

The Sixty Verses on Reasoning says, as well,

We observe what we call
The wearing out,
Or coming to a rest,

From the simple wearing out
Of the cause.


[1908]
ZHES MYU GU SOGS KYI DNGOS PO DANG, DE ZHIG PA DE’I DNGOS POR MED PA GNYIS KA ‘DUS BYAS DANG, SNUM LTA BU’I RGYU ZAD PA NI MAR ME LTA BU’I ‘BRAS BU ZAD PA’I RGYUR GSUNGS PAS, ‘PHAGS PA’I BZHED PAR GDON MI ZA BAR ‘DOD PAR BYA’O,,

What this is saying is that both entities like sprouts and the like—and the non-entitying of the the same objects, their stopping—are produced things; that the exhaustion of the causes for something, such as the oil in a lamp, is itself a cause for the stopping of the result of something like the lamp.  And beyond any shadow of a doubt, a position taken by the Realized One is a position that we would all have to agree with.


[1909]
SKAD CIG DANG PO DUS GNYIS PAR ZHIG PA NI DNGOS SU DGAG BYA BCAD NAS RTOGS DGOS PAS, DGAG PA NI YIN LA MED DGAG NI MA YIN PAS MA YIN DGAG STE, ZHIG RGYU DE BCAD PA TZAM MIN GYI DE BCAD PA’I DNGOS PO ZHIG ‘PHANGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The fact that the first instant stops at the point of the second is something we comprehend by cancelling—directly—what the statement denies.  Therefore what we have here is a denial, but not the kind of denial where something is absent; rather, it is a denial of the type where something is not something else.  Which is to say, it is not that we are simply cancelling the thing it is that is coming to an end; rather, a functional entity represented by the cancellation of this thing is, further, being suggested.


[1910]
SGRUB BYED LHAG MA NI RGYAS PAR RTZA SHE’I t’IKKA LAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

The remaining logical argument in support of this idea is something that you can learn by studying the commentary on Wisdom.


[1911]
‘DI NI LUGS ‘DI’I RIGS PA PHRA LA DON CHE BA CIG TU ‘DUG GO ,,

By the way, this is a logical argument of this school which is very subtle, and very important.



Sesame & petals:
deep seed storage

[1912]
[f. 143b] GNYIS PA NI,

Here then is our second section from above: how to posit a foundation for deep seeds even if we don’t accept foundation consciousness.


[1913]
GAL TE KUN GZHI RNAM SHES KHAS MI LEN KYANG DGE MI DGE’I BAG CHAGS ‘JOG PA DANG, BAG CHAGS DE SMIN PA LAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BAR ‘DOD DGOS TE, ‘JUG ‘GREL LAS, THOG MA MED PA’I ‘KHOR BAR DNGOS PO’I BAG CHAGS BZHAG PA YONGS SU SMIN PA, DNGOS PO LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PA, ZHES DANG, DE ‘DRA BA GZHAN YANG MANG DU ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Even if we don’t accept the idea of a foundation consciousness, we still have to agree that virtuous and non-virtuous deep seeds can be planted; and that as these seeds ripen, they give forth results.  As the autocommentary to Entering the Middle Way puts it,

In the cycle of suffering with no beginning, the deep seeds of things have been planted, and have ripened.  And we have had a deep belief in those things…

And we see many other such references as well.


[1914]
DE YANG BAG CHAGS ‘JOG PA’I GZHI MED PAR MI RUNG BAS GZHI DE GANG YIN ZHE NA,

Here though one might ask—

And yet it would be wrong to say that there was no place at all where the deep seeds are planted; what then would that place be, according to you?


[1915]
JI LTAR KUN GZHI RNAM SHES KHAS LEN PA RNAMS KYI LTAR NA, NYON YID KYIS NGA’O SNYAM DU DMIGS PA’I GZHIR GYUR PA’I KUN GZHI RNAM SHES BAG CHAGS KYI GNAS SU ‘DOD PA DE BZHIN DU LUGS ‘DIS KYANG NGA’O SNYAM PA TZAM GYI BLO LHAN SKYES KYI DMIGS PA DE NYID BAG CHAGS SGO BA’I GZHIR BZHED DO,,

In response, we can say that those who accept the idea of a foundation consciousness would assert that there is a foundation consciousness which functions as the place that negative consciousness focuses upon, and thinks, “This is me.”  In the same way, those who follow the present system assert that there is a location that an inborn tendency to think, simply, “me” focuses upon; and that this is the place which is imbued with our deep seeds.


[1916]
‘O NA ‘JUG ‘GREL LAS, SEMS KYI RGYUN BAG CHAGS KYI GZHIR GSUNGS PA JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

“Well then,” one may ask, “what about that reference in the autcommentary to Entering the Middle Way, where it says that the flow of the mind is the location for the deep seeds?”


[1917]
NGA TZAM DE NYID SEMS RNAM SHES LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I RGYUD YIN PAS, SEMS KYI RGYUD CES KYANG BYA LA, SEMS NYID KYI RIGS ‘DRAL {%’DRA LA} DE’I RGYUD CES PA LTAR NA, DE YANG RES ‘GA’ BA’I BAG CHAGS SGO BA’I GZHIR ‘GYUR RO,,

The simple me is itself the “flow” that we talk about relative to the mind, to consciousness.  This is why we can even talk about “a flow of the mind.”  The mind itself tends to continue on in a series of similar cases; and thus we can speak of its “flow.”  From this point of view, this is what provides a place which is imbued with deep seeds, whose own nature is one of coming and going.


[1918]
MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS KYI TSUL NI, ‘JUG ‘GREL LAS,

Here is how the autocommentary to Entering the Middle Way describes how the deep seeds of misunderstanding work.


[1919]
GANG GIS SEMS KYI RGYUD ‘GAG {%Teng, correct: ‘BAG} PAR BYED CING SGO BAR BYED LA, RJES SU BGROD PAR BYED PA NI BAG CHAGS TE, NYON MONGS PA’I MUR THUG PA DANG, GOMS PA DANG RTZA BA DANG BAG CHAGS ZHES BYA BA NI RNAM GRANGS DAG GO ,

That thing which functions to infect, or imbue, the flow of the mind—that thing which follows behind it—is the deep seeds.  They continue on as long as our condition of negativity continues; and they are known by many different names: “the habit,” or “the root,” or “deep seeds.”


[1920]
DE NI ZAG PA MED PA’I LAM GYIS [f. 144a] NYON MONGS PA SPANGS SU ZIN KYANG, NYAN THOS DANG RANG SANGS RGYAS KYIS SPANG BAR MI NUS TE, TIL MAR DANG ME TOG LA SOGS PA BSAL DU ZIN KYANG, BUM PA DANG SNAM BU LA SOGS PA RNAMS LA DE {Teng: de dag} DANG PHRAD PAS YON TAN PHRA MO DMIGS PA BZHIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

Now we may have accomplished the elimination of negativity by utilizing the path that is free of impurity; and yet these deep seeds are not something that listeners and self-made buddhas are able to eliminate.  Suppose for example that we have been storing sesame seed, or flower petals, or anything of the like in a clay vase, or a fold of cloth, or such.  We can take the seed or petals out of where we’ve been storing them, but due to the contact that these objects have been sharing with their containers, we can still detect some subtle trace of them in those receptacles.


[1921]
DGE MI DGE’I BAG CHAGS LA SOGS PA’I BAG CHAGS GZHAN LA YANG GZHI GNYIS SU ‘GYUR BA JI LTAR RIGS PAR SBYAR RO,,

You can apply this same sort of thinking to other specifics of deep seeds; for example, to deep seeds of virtue or non-virtue; to where you would have a dual location.


[1922]
‘O NA MTHONG LAM BAR CHAD MED LAM GYI DUS SU DE’I SPANG BYA MTHONG SPANG MED MOD KYANG, SGOM SPANG GI BAG LA NYAL YOD DGOS LA,

One might come then with the following thought:

We would have to say that—at the point where we are in the uninterrupted stage within the path of seeing—those deep seeds which are eliminated by the path of seeng are no longer present; nonetheless, those which will be eliminated by the path of habituation would have to still be present, in a dormant state.


[1923]
DE’I TSE YID KYI SHES PA NI GNYIS SNANG ‘KHRUL BA’I BAG CHAGS KYIS MA BSLAD PA’I ZAG MED YIN PAS, DE’I NGO BOR BAG LA NYAL DE GNAS PA MI RIGS LA, DBANG SHES KYANG DE’I RTEN DU MED CING GZUGS KYANG DE’I RTEN DU MI RIGS LA

At this point though, the awareness of our thought is unstained, in the sense that it is not infected by the deep seeds for the error of the discrepancy.  As such, it would be incorrect to say that the seeds were remaining in a dormant state as part & parcel with this awareness.  Neither could there be any sense consciousness which were acting as their basis; and it would be illogical to say that physical form itself were providing the base.


[1924]
KUN GZHI YANG MI ‘DOD PAS DE’I RTEN MED PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NA,

And since, finally, you deny the existence of foundation consciousness, aren’t you saying then that there is in fact no basis at all where the deep seeds can be located?


[1925]
SKYON MED DE DE’I TSE NGA TZAM ZHIG SGOM SPANG GI BAG LA NYAL GYI RTEN YIN PA’I PHYIR TE, SPANG GNYEN GZHAN LA YANG DE BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And yet there is no such problem.  At that particular point, the simple “me” is providing the basis for the deep seeds which are to be eliminated by the path of habituation, and are staying at this juncture in a dormant state.  And you can understand the situation with other examples of qualities to be eliminated, and their antidotes, as being the same.


[1926]
LUGS ‘DI’I GANG ZAG GI ‘JOG TSUL THUN MONG MA YIN PA SHES NA NAM MKHA’ DANG RNAM SHES MTHA’ YAS DANG CI YANG MED PA GSUM DU SKYES PA’I ‘PHAGS PA’I RGYUD LA, ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA ZAG MED KYI SEMS MNGON DU GYUR PA NA, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I SEMS GZHAN MED PAS DE RNAMS KYI ‘GRO BA LDOG PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES PA DANG,

If we can come to an understanding of the unique manner in which this particular system posits the person, then it would appear that our position could no longer be challenged by arguments such as the following.  The first here would be where someone asks us to consider the mind stream of a realized being who has taken birth into one of the three levels of Limitless Space; Limitless Awareness; or Nothing At All.  When a state of mind which transcends the normal world—an unstained state of mind—manifests itself, then since there can be no other, worldly states of mind, their functioning is said to be suspended.


[1927]
SRID RTZER SKYES PA’I ‘PHAGS PA LA [f. 144b] CI YANG MED PA’I SAR GTOGS PA’I ZAG MED KYI SEMS MNGON DU GYUR PA NA, SRID RTZE DANG CI YANG MED PA GNYIS KA’I SAS BSDUS PA’I ‘GRO BA LDOG PAR ‘GYUR TE, ZAG MED KYI SEMS DE’I GNAS NI ‘GRO BA DE GNYIS DANG, MYANG NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA’I ‘GRO BAR MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I

Or else we can consider the case where a realized being has taken birth into the level known as Peak of Existence, but they have manifested an unstained state of mind taken in by the level of Nothing At All.  This then blocks any possibility of them passing to a state subsumed by either the Peak of Existence or by Nothing At All, since it would be inappropriate to describe the location of an unstained state of mind as either one of these two types of existence, or as a state of existence within the state of nirvana.


[1928]
RIGS PA RNAMS KYIS KYANG MI GNOD PAR MNGON TE, ZAG BCAS DANG ZAG MED KYI SEMS GANG YANG ‘GRO BA DE DAG GI MTSAN GZHIR MA BZHAG KYANG ‘GRO BA BZHAG PAS CHOG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The reason that these arguments would no longer be a challenge is that—even though there is no state of mind either stained or unstained which we could point to as a typical example for any of these states of existence—we can nonetheless posit such states.


[1929]
PHYOGS SNGA MA’I LUGS NI, LAM MA ZHUGS DANG SLOB PA RNAMS KYI ‘GRO BA’I NGO BO MA SGRIBS LUNG MA BSTAN GYI DBANG DU MDZAD PA’O,,

The previous position here is taken relative to the idea that the content of states of existence for those who are not entered upon a path—and those who are still learning—is neutral karma of the type that does not act as an obstacle.


[1930]
LAN DE DAG KYANG BDAG ‘DRA BAS LUGS CHEN PO RNAMS LA RANG STOBS KYIS BRJOD PAR GA LA NUS, ‘ON KYANG MGON PO KLU SGRUB KYI DGONGS PA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU RDZOGS PAR ‘JOG SHES PA’I SHING RTA CHEN PO DAG GI LUGS LA BRTEN NAS SMRAS PA YIN NO,,

As for these responses, how could anyone like me ever display my own capacity to speak to the positions of the great ones?  I have though made my comments here relying upon the system of those magnificent innovators who possess themselves the knowledge of how to set forth, in their entirety, positions which represent the true intent of our Savior, Nagarjuna.


[1931]
DE RNAMS LA DPAGS NA KUN GZHI SGRUB PA’I RIGS PA LHAG MA RNAMS KYIS KYANG LUGS ‘DI LA MI GNOD PAR MNGON TE, BLO GROS CHE ZHING ZHIB LA RNO BA RNAMS KYIS RTZAD GCAD PAR BYA’O,,

It would seem that we can extrapolate from the points we have covered here what we need to show that remaining arguments in favor of a foundation consciousness in no way challenge the present system; and so those of you who possess a great degree of understanding—a detailed degree, and sharp—can go ahead and dissect those accordingly.



Karma in a dream

[1932]
GNYIS PA NI, SNGAR LAS ‘GAGS PA LAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BAR BSHAD PA’I DON DE NYID DPE’I SGO NAS BSHAD PA,

This brings us to the second of our more general topics from above: the presentation of a metaphor to illustrate the point of how a karmic consequence can come from the karma itself having stopped earlier.


	[1933]
[VI.40]
Svapnopalabdhān viṣayān avetya
bodhe’pi mūḍhasya yathaiva saṅgaḥ,
Saṃjāyate tadvad asat svabhāvāt
phalaṃ niruddhād api karmaṇo’sti.

,RMI LAM DMIGS PA’I YUL DAG MTHONG NAS NI,
,SAD KYANG BLUN LA CHAGS PA SKYE ‘GYUR BA,
,DE BZHIN ‘GAGS SHING RANG BZHIN YOD MIN PA’I,
,LAS LAS KYANG NI ‘BRAS BU YOD PA YIN,

		One may see certain objects
		Perceived inside a dream;

		And then foolish people
		Might awake,
		And begin to feel desire.

		Just so,
		A karma which is not
		Something that exists
		With any nature of its own

		Can stop,	
		And there can be
		A consequence from it.


[1934]
RMI LAM NA BUD MED BZANG MO DMIGS PA’I YUL DAG MTHONG NAS NI, DE NAS GNYID SAD KYANG SAD PA’I TSE NA YANG SKYE BO BLUN PO LA DA LTA ‘GAGS SHING MED PA LA DMIGS NAS CHAGS PA DRAG PO SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA

Someone may see certain objects—such as a beautiful woman—that they perceive inside a dream.  And then certain foolish people might wake up, and—even though they have awoken—focus on something that has now already stopped, and is no longer there, and begin to feel intense desire for it.


[1935]
DE BZHIN [f. 145a] DU RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN PA’I LAS ‘GAGS PA LAS KYANG NI, LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA YOD PA YIN NO, ZHES LAS ZHIG PA LAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BAR BSTAN NO,,

Just so, it can also happen that a karma which is not something that exists through any nature of its own can stop, and there can be a consequence of that karma which comes forth from it.  What all this is indicating is that a consequence can issue forth from the stopping of a karma.


[1936]
DE’I SHES BYED DU SRID PA ‘PHO BA’I MDO LAS RGYAL PO CHEN PO ‘DI LTA STE DPER NA MI ZHIG NYAL BA’I RMI LAM NA YUL GYI BUD MED BZANG MO DANG LHAN CIG SPYOD PAR RMIS LA, DE NYAL BA LAS SAD NAS YUL GYI BUD MED BZANG MO DRAN NA,

Support for this illustration is found in the sutra entitled Moving Between Lives:

This, great king, is how it is.  Take for example a man who goes to sleep, and then in his dreams he sees something: he dreams that he is enjoying himself with a beautiful woman.  And then, when he wakes from his sleep, he recalls the beautiful woman he had perceived.


[1937]
RGYAL PO CHEN PO ‘DI JI SNYAM DU SEMS, ‘O NA GANG RMI LAM GYI YUL GYI BUD MED BZANG MO DANG LHAN CIG YONGS SU SPYOD PAR RMIS LA, DE NYAL BA LAS SAD NAS YUL GYI BUD MED BZANG MO DRAN PA’I MI DE CI MKHAS PA’I RANG BZHIN CAN YIN NAM,

And what, o great king, do you think on this?  What about this man who was enjoying himself with that beautiful woman who was only an object in a dream?  Who wakes up from his sleep, and can’t stop thinking about this thing in the dream—the beautiful woman.  Would we say that he was, by nature, a person who was wise?


[1938]
GSOL PA BCOM LDAN ‘DAS DA NI MA LAGS TE, DE CI’I SLAD DU ZHE NA, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS RMI LAM GYI BUD MED BZANG MO YANG MA MCHIS SHING, MI DMIGS PA LAGS NA, DE DANG YONGS SU SPYOD PA LTA GA LA MCHIS TE, ‘DI LTAR MI DE NI PHONGS SHING DUB PA’I SKAL BA CAN DU ‘GYUR LAGS SO, ZHES DRANGS PA NI DPE STON PA’O,,

And the king replied,

O Conqueror, this would not be the case.  And why would we say that?  Because, o Conqueror, this beautiful woman in the dream does not even exist; there is no such woman.  And what need then to mention the time spent enjoying her?  The man in this case is just a poor fellow of little fortune, who is exhausting himself.

This then is the section of the sutra which provides us a metaphor for our current question.


[1939]
DE DON DANG SBYOR BA NI, RGYAL PO CHEN PO DE BZHIN DU BYIS PA SO SO’I SKYE BO THOS PA DANG MI LDAN PA YANG MIG GIS GZUGS RNAMS MTHONG NAS YID BDE BAR ‘GYUR BA’I GZUGS RNAMS LA MNGON PAR ZHEN TE, MNGON PAR ZHEN PAR GYUR NAS CHAGS PA SKYED PAR BYED DO,,

And then the sutra relates this metaphor to its referent—

O great king, infants who have no learning are the same.  With their eyes they see certain forms, and then they begin to feel attraction for those forms which are pleasing.  And once the attraction starts, then that incites in them desire.


[1940]
CHAGS NAS ‘DOD CHAGS LAS BYUNG BA DANG, ZHE SDANG LAS BYUNG BA DANG, GTI MUG LAS BYUNG BA’I LUS DANG NGAG DANG YID KYIS MNGON [f. 145b] PAR ‘DU BYED DO,,

Once the desire has begun, then they start to undertake physical, verbal, and mental actions; and these spring from ignorant liking, ignorant disliking, and dark ignorance itself.


[1941]
LAS DE MNGON PAR ‘DU BYAS PAR GYUR NAS ‘GAG GO ,’GAGS PA NA SHAR PHYOGS SU BRTEN TE GNAS PA MA YIN PA NAS, PHYOGS MTSAMS RNAMS SU MA YIN NO ZHES BYA BA’I BAR DANG, ZHES GSUNGS TE

And once they have undertaken these karmas, then those karmas come to a stop.  But once they do stop, it’s not as if they remain somehow over to the east…

From here the citation continues up to: “Neither do the karmas remain in any of the ordinal directions.”


[1942]
THOS PA DANG MI LDAN PA NI DE KHO NA NYID STON PA THOS PA LAS DE NYID RTOGS PA MED PA’O,,

When the sutra mentions “those who have no learning,” what it’s referring to is those who have heard teachings on suchness, but who have failed to realize it.


[1943]
MNGON PAR ZHEN PA NI BDEN ZHEN NO,,

And when it speaks of “attraction,” what this means is an attraction to seeing things as existing in reality.


[1944]
CHAGS PA LAS BYUNG BA’I LAS GSUM LA NI, DGE MI DGE’I LAS GNYIS KA DANG, ZHE SDANG LAS BYUNG BA’I LAS NI MI DGE BA DANG, GTI MUG LAS BYUNG BA LA YANG LAS GNYIS KA GSOG PA YOD DO,,

When the sutra mentions three kinds of karma that come from desire, it is talking about both virtuous and non-virtuous karma [that come from ignorant liking]; about non-virtuous karma that comes from ignorant disliking; and again the fact that we can collect both types of karma, from dark ignorance.


[1945]
LAS BYAS MA THAG TU ‘GAGS PA NI THA SNYAD DU DANG, LHAG MAS NI ‘GAG PA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA BKAG GO

When the sutra mentions karma stopping just after its commission, this is meant in a nominal sense.  And then the remainder is denying that the stopping could occur through some essential nature of its own.


[1946]
,DE NAS DUS GZHAN CI TZAM ZHIG NA ‘CHI BA’I DUS DANG TSOD NYE BAR GNAS PA’I TSE, DE DANG SKAL BA ‘DRA BA’I LAS DE’I TSE ‘PHEN BYED ZAD NAS, RNAM PAR SHES PA THA MA ‘GAG PA’I TSE ‘DI LTA STE, DPER NA NYAL NYAL BA LAS SAD PA’I MI’I YUL GYI BUD MED BZANG MO LTA BUR YID LAS DE NYID {%Kangyur: LTA BUR LAS DE YID} LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS TE,

And then,

A certain amount of time passes and the karma stops; and then later comes a point where we are fairly close to the time of death.  At this juncture, the projection of karma of the same likeness is exhausted, and the final moment of consciousness draws to a close.  At this point, it’s similar for example to the point at which that man has woken from his deep sleep, and brings to mind the beautiful woman: the karma too is brought to mind.


[1947]
SKAL BA ‘DRA BA STE PHUNG PO RIGS MTHUN TSE ‘DIR GNAS PA’I LAS ZAD NAS, TSE ‘DI’I RNAM SHES THA MA ‘GAG PA’I TSE, CHAGS LDAN SAD MA THAG TU RMI LAM GYI MDZES MA DRAN TE,

When they speak about “karma of the same likeness” here, what they’re referring to is karma for the continuation of the parts of the person in their same form, over the length of this life.  And then the final moment of this life’s awareness comes to a stop; and at this point it’s similar to where the man with desire first wakes up, and immediately recalls the beautiful woman from the dream. 


[1948]
YID DE LA PHYOGS PA BZHIN DU ‘CHI KHA’I TSE TSE PHYI MAR GANG SMIN PA’I LAS KYI NUS PA SAD PA’I LAS DE LA YID PHYOGS PAR ‘GYUR GYI DRAN PA MIN NO,,

Just as he directs his mind in this manner, at the moment of death we direct our thoughts to the karma that is about to ripen in the life to come: to the karma whose potential is now awakening.  Again, this is a directing of our thoughts, and not actually a remembering, as it was with the dream woman.


[1949]
DE LTAR RNAM PAR SHES PA THA MA ‘GAG CING, SKYE BA’I CHAR GTOGS PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA [f. 146a] DANG PO YANG NA NI LHA DAG GI NANG DU ZHES BYA BA NAS, YANG NA NI YI DVAGS RNAMS SU ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES BYA BA’I BAR DANG, ZHES GSUNGS TE THA MA ‘GAG PA NI TSE ‘DI’I ‘O,,

Thus then “the final moment of awareness comes to a stop”; and we have our first moment of awareness subsumed by our new birth.  This can come, as the sutra puts it, “among the pleasure beings,” on up to, alternately, “among the craving spirits.”  The “final moment” that stops here refers to the final moment of this current life.


[1950]
SKYE BA’I CHAR GTOGS PA’I RNAM SHES DANG PO ‘BYUNG BA LA LHA DAG GI NANG DU ZHES SOGS GSUNGS SHING, BAR SRID ‘GRO BA DRUG PO MIN PAS SKYE SRID KYI RNAM SHES YIN TE,

When they are referring here to the first moment of awareness taken in by our new birth, they mention “among the pleasure beings” and so forth.  What they are talking about here is the awareness of the being at rebirth; since the being during the period between death and rebirth is not technically counted among the six types of rebirth.


[1951]
SKYE ‘CHI GNYIS KYI BAR NA BAR SRID YOD KYANG MA GSUNGS PA MANG BAR SNANG BAS, GTZO BOR SKYE ‘CHI’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’I LAS ‘BRAS BU DANG ‘BREL TSUL GTAN LA DBAB PAR BZHED PA’O,,

That is, there does exist an intermediate being between death and rebirth, but we see many instances in scripture where it is not specifically mentioned.  Which is to say, Lord Buddha primarily wishes here to describe the manner in which karma is connected to its consequences, with reference to the process of death and rebirth.


[1952]
DE NAS RNAM PAR SHES PA DANG PO DE ‘GAGS MA THAG TU GANG LA RNAM PAR SMIN PA MYONG BAR ‘GYUR BAR MNGON PA DE DANG SKAL PA ‘DRA BA’I SEMS KYI RGYUN ‘BYUNG NGO,,

And then “when that first moment of consciousness has stopped, just after that we undergo whatever karmic ripening is meant to manifest for us; and then the mind flows on in matching moments of the same form of consciousness.”


[1953]
RGYAL PO CHEN PO DE LA CHOS GANG YANG ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI NAS ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL TU ‘PHO BA YANG MED LA, ‘CHI ‘PHO BA DANG SKYE BAR MNGON PA YANG YOD DE, RGYAL PO CHEN PO DE LA GANG RNAM PAR SHES PA THA MA ‘GAGS PA DE NI ‘CHI ‘PHO BA ZHES BYA, GANG RNAM PAR SHES PA DANG PO ‘BYUNG BA DE NI SKYE BA ZHES BYA’O,,

And,

O great king, you should understand that there is no entity at all which moves from this world to the world beyond; and yet, nonetheless, the actions of dying, and moving on, and being reborn can all make their appearance.  The point is, great king, that whatever we say is the stopping of the final moment of awareness—the dying and the moving on—is what we say is the starting of the first moment of awareness: the being born.


[1954]
RGYAL PO CHEN PO RNAM PAR SHES PA THA MA ‘GAGS PA’I TSE YANG GANG DU YANG MI ‘GRO’O,,

When the final moment of awareness, great king, comes to a stop, it’s not as though anything goes on to anywhere.


[1955]
RNAM PAR SHES PA SKYE BA’I CHAR GTOGS PA ‘BYUNG BA’I TSE YANG GANG NAS KYANG ‘ONG BA MED DO,,

And when it happens that we count some point of consciousness as being part of rebirth, it’s not as though something came from somewhere else.


[1956]
DE CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, RANG BZHIN GYIS DBEN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And why is that?  It’s because these things are totally devoid of any nature of their own.


[1957]
RGYAL PO CHEN PO DE LA RNAM PAR SHES PA THA MA NI RNAM PAR SHES PA THA MAS STONG NGO,,

That is, great king, the final moment of consciousness is empty of being the final moment of consciousness.


[1958]
‘CHI ‘PHO NI ‘CHI ‘PHO BAS STONG NGO,,

And dying and moving on is empty of dying and moving on.


[1959]
LAS NI LAS KYIS STONG NGO,,

And karma is empty of karma.


[1960]
RNAM PAR [f. 146b] SHES PA DANG PO NI RNAM PAR SHES PA DANG POS STONG NGO,,

And the first moment of awareness is empty of the first moment of awareness.


[1961]
SKYE BA NI SKYE BAS STONG LA LAS RNAMS CHUD MI ZA BAR YANG MNGON NO,,

And birth is empty of birth; and yet still we can see the truth that the actions we commit—our karma—never just fades away.


[1962]
ZHES GSUNGS TE SKYE SRID DU NYING MTSAMS SBYAR BA’I SNGON LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU BDE SDUG CIG MYONG BAS, DE MYONG BA’I RNAM SHES KYI RGYUN SKYE SEMS DANG PO LAS SKYE BA DANG, ‘CHI ‘PHO BA DANG SKYE BA THA SNYAD DU YOD LA, DON DAM PAR MED PA DANG

What this is saying is that we are experiencing the combined consequence of pleasure and pain from the karma that was previous to the point where we crossed over into the being at rebirth.  As such, the flow of the awareness which experiences these things is born from the first moment of the mind at rebirth; while the dying, the moving on, and the being reborn all do exist, nominally—but they do not exist in an ultimate sense.


[1963]
DE’I RGYU MTSAN RANG BZHIN GYIS DBEN ZHES PA NI, DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA STE RNAM SHES THA MA SOGS RANG RANG GIS STONG PAR GSUNGS PA LA SBYAR BAR BYA’O,,

And the reason for this last is that they are “totally devoid of any nature of their own.”  In this case the object denied by emptiness is being qualified; and Lord Buddha begins describing the final moment of consciousness and so forth as each being empty of themselves.


[1964]
DE LTAR BSTAN PA NA LAS ‘BRAS YOD PA MIN PAR BZUNG GIS DOGS NAS LAS RNAMS CHUD MI ZA BAR GSUNGS SO,,

Fearing that—if he describes things this way—people will start to hold the idea that the very principles of karma and its consequences do not exist at all, Lord Buddha wraps up by mentioning the fact that “karma never just fades away.”



Overthinking karma

[1965]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, RNAM SMIN THUG MED DU ‘BYIN PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA DANG, KUN GZHI YOD PAR GSUNGS PA’I LUNG DANG ‘GAL BA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O,,

This brings us to our third point from above: disproving any debate that may arise about the previous presentation.  Here we will cover two topics—disproving debate which argues that never-ending ripenings would be given forth; and disproving debate which argues that our position contradicts scriptural statements that a foundation consciousness does exist.


[1966]
DANG PO NI, GAL TE LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA LA RANG BZHIN GYIS ZAD PA MED PAS RNAM SMIN ‘BYUNG BAR ‘DOD NA DE BZHIN DU RNAM PAR SMIN ZIN PA LAS KYANG YANG RNAM PAR SMIN PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR THUG PA MED PA’I SKYON DU ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NA,

Here is the first.  Suppose the following thought occurs to someone:

If we accept the idea that a karmic ripening which cannot end through any nature of its own has arisen—again, not through any nature of its own—then similarly we would have to say that, after it has finished ripening, it would have to ripen once again.  And then there arises the problem that it would have to keep happening like that, endlessly.


	[1967]
[VI.41]
Tulye’pyasattve viṣayasya yadvat
keśākṛtiṃ taimirikaḥ paraiti,
Na sarva bhāvākṛtim ityavaihi
tathā vipakvān na punar vipākam.

,JI LTAR YUL NI YOD NYID MIN MTSUNGS KYANG,
,RAB RIB CAN GYIS SKRA SHAD RNAM PAR NI,
,MTHONG GI DNGOS GZHAN RNAM PAR MA YIN LTAR,
,DE BZHIN SMIN LAS SLAR SMIN MIN SHES KYIS {%GYIS},

		It’s also like objects
		Equivalent in the way
		They’re not really there;

		Those with cataracts
		Are sure they see
		Strands of hair,

		But other things
		That we don’t even see.

		Similarly,
		You should understand
		That it’s not as if
		What has ripened
		Will ripen once again.
		

[1968]
JI LTAR TE DPER NA YUL NI YOD PA NYID MIN PAR MTSUNGS BZHIN DU, RAB RIB CAN GYI MIG GIS YOD PA MIN PA’I SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA’I RNAM PAR NI MTHONG GI ,DE LAS GZHAN PA’I DNGOS PO’I RNAM PA BONG BU’I RVA DANG, MO GSHAM GYI BU LA SOGS PA’I RNAM PAR MTHONG BA MA YIN PA LTAR,

It’s like, for example, how specific objects might be equivalent in the way that they are not really there.  Eyes affected by cataracts are sure they see strands of hair or the like which don’t even exist; but there are other appearances of things that we don’t even see—things like the horns on a rabbit’s head, or the child of a barren woman.


[1969]
DE BZHIN DU LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MIN PAR MTSUNGS [f. 147a] BZHIN DU, SMIN MA ZIN PA LAS SMIN PA DANG, SMIN ZIN PA LAS SLAR YANG SMIN PA MIN PAR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

Similarly, karma is equivalent in that it is not something which can exist through any nature of its own.  You should understand that—when the karma has not yet ripened—it can go on to ripen; but it’s not as if karma which has already ripened is going to go ahead and ripen once again.


[1970]
,DPE ‘DI LAS LAS RNAMS KYI ‘BRAS BU NGES PAR ‘GRUB PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, DGE MI DGE’I LAS LAS YID DU ‘ONG MI ‘ONG GI ‘BRAS BU YANG SO SOR NGES SO ZHES BSHAD PA,

This example serves not only to inform us about how consequences come, with certainty, from karma.  Rather, we also hear about how either pleasant or unpleasant consequences respectively come, with certainty, from virtuous and non-virtuous karma.


	[1971]
[VI.42]
Ato hi kṛṣṇād aśubho vipākaḥ
śubhād vipākaḥ śubha eva dṛṣṭaḥ,
Śubhāśubhābhāvadhiyaś ca mokṣaś
cintāniṣedhaḥ phala karmaṇāṃ ca.

,DE PHYIR RNAM SMIN MI DGE NAG PO’I LAS,
,RNAM SMIN DGE NYID DGE LAS YIN MTHONG ZHING,
,DGE MI DGE MED BLO CAN THAR ‘GYUR TE,
,LAS ‘BRAS RNAMS LA SEMS PA’ANG DGAG PA MDZAD,

		As such, we can see
		That a non-virtuous ripening
		Is black karma,

		While that virtuous ripening
		Is from a good deed.

		And also intelligent ones
		Who understand
		There exists no virtue
		Nor non-virtue
		Come to be freed.

		And they undertake
		To prevent overthinking
		Karma & its consequences.


[1972]
RAB RIB CAN GYI MIG GIS SKRA SHAD SOGS MTHONG BA DANG, BONG BU’I RVA LA SOGS PA MI MTHONG BA’I NGES PA DE’I PHYIR RNAM SMIN YID DU ‘ONG BA NI MI DGE BA LAS MI ‘BYUNG LA, RNAM SMIN YID DU MI ‘ONG BA NI DGE BA LAS MA YIN PA’I PHYIR, RNAM SMIN MI DGE BA STE YID DU MI ‘ONG BA NI, NAG PO’I LAS LAS YIN LA, RNAM SMIN DGE BA STE YID DU ‘ONG BA NI DGE BA LAS ‘BYUNG BA YIN PAR MTHONG ZHING,

Eyes affected by cataracts see things like strands of hair; but it is definite that they do not see things like horns on top of the head of a rabbit.  As such, it is not the case that a pleasant ripening of karma can come from a non-virtuous deed; and neither can an unpleasant ripening come from a virtuous deed.  We can see then that a non-virtuous ripening—an unpleasant one—is something that comes from a black karma; while a virtuous ripening—a pleasant one—is something that comes from a good deed.


[1973]
DGE BA DANG MI DGE BA’I LAS MED PA’I BLO CAN TE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MI DMIGS PAR RTOGS PA NI ‘KHOR BA LAS THAR BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And also, those intelligent ones who understand that there exists no virtuous karma, nor non-virtuous karma—that is, those who realize that it is an impossibility for karma to exist through any nature of its own—come to be freed from the cycle of suffering.


[1974]
DE’I PHYIR RGYAL BAS SO SO SKYE BO LAS KYI KHYAD PAR ‘DI DANG ‘DI LAS ‘BRAS BU’I KHYAD PAR ‘DI DANG ‘DI ‘BYUNG BA’I RGYU MTSAN ‘THAD SGRUB KYI RIGS PAS ZHIB PAR NGES PAR DPYOD PAR BYED PA RNAMS LA, LAS DANG ‘BRAS BU LA SKUR PA BTAB PA LAS KUN RDZOB ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR DU ‘ONG SNYAM STE, LAS RNAMS KYI ‘BRAS BU RNAM PAR SMIN PA NI BSAM GYIS MI KHYAB BO, ZHES LAS DANG ‘BRAS BU RNAMS LA BRTEN PA’I SEMS PA STE DPYAD PA’ANG DGAG PAR MDZAD DO,,

And so the Victors have undertaken to prove the correctness of karma to common beings, with reasons such as “You will get this or that particular kind of consequence from committing this or that particular karma”; for they know that, on a conventional level, it will be the destruction of these individuals if they discount the laws of karma & its consequences.  And so they undertake to prevent these types of people from overthinking things—from overanalyzing them—with regard to the laws of karma & its consequences; they tell them, “Oh, the way that consequences ripen from karma is simply inconceivable.”


[1975]
GZHUNG ‘DIR DE ‘DRA BA’I SGO MANG PO NAS LAS ‘BRAS KYI NGES PA STOR DU DOGS NAS [f. 147b] SGO DU MA NAS LAS ‘BRAS KYI NGES PA SKYED THABS MDZAD PA ‘DI SHES PAR GYIS LA, STONG PA NYID KYI LTA BAS KYANG DE’I NGES PA BRTAN PA’I GROGS BYAS PA’I STENG NAS, DA RES RIN PO CHE’I GLING DU PHYIN PA STONG LOG TU MI ‘GRO BA LA ‘BAD PAR BYOS SHIG

We have to understand then how—in this classic—the author has a fear that, in many different ways, his readers might react by having their certainty about the laws of karma & its consequences shattered; and so he undertakes different methods to inspire in them this confidence in karma & consequences.  And he sees moreover that a correct view of emptiness acts as an aid in making this confidence even more firm.  I urge you then not on this occasion to labor in a journey to the Isle of Jewels, only to return empty-handed.



An intent of self-correction

[1976]
,GNYIS PA LA GSUM, LUNG ‘GAL SPONG BA’I TSIG DON DNGOS, YID SHES LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I KUN GZHI BSHAD MA BSHAD KYI TSUL, DGONGS PA’I DBANG GIS GSUNGS PA’I DPE BSTAN PA’O,,

This brings us to the second topic here—disproving debate which argues that our position contradicts scriptural statements that a foundation consciousness does exist.  We cover this in three different steps: a presentation of the actual meaning of the wording which denies that we contradict scripture; the way in which a foundation consciousness essentially separate from consciousness of the thought is either explained, or not explained; and the presentation of a metaphor to demonstrate that statements in this regard were only figurative.


[1977]
DANG PO NI, GAL TE DA {%DE} LTAR KUN GZHI MED KYANG LAS ‘BRAS KYI ‘BREL PA RNAM PAR ‘JOG NUS NA, ‘O NA LANG KAR GSHEGS PA DANG, LA SOGS PAS DGONGS ‘GREL DANG, THEG PA CHEN PO’I CHOS MNGON PA’I MDO LAS, KUN GZHI RNAM PAR SHES PA ZHES PA,

As for the first, one may begin with the following question:

Suppose it is, as you have described, the case that—even in the absence of a foundation consciousness—we can still posit a connection between karma and its consequences.  But then what about mentions of foundation consciousness in A Journey to Langka and “the rest”—a reference to What I Really Meant, and the classic text upon higher knowledge according to the higher way?


[1978]
DNGOS PO’I CHOS MTHA’ DAG PA’I NUS PA’I KHYAD PAR GYI GZHI SA BON THAMS CAD PA, RGYA MTSO LAS RLABS RNAMS ‘BYUNG BA LTAR, PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO THAMS CAD SKYE BA’I RGYUR GSUNGS PA DE, RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU DE’I RNAM GZHAG ‘JOG PA MED ZHIG GAM ZHE NA,

In those places, this consciousness is described as a foundation which includes within it all of the mental seeds there are—a foundation which is responsible for all the different potential of each & every functioning entity there is.  It is said to be the cause behind the birth of each & every functional thing, whether outside of us or within—just as the ocean itself is where all waves rise from.  Is it then the case that we can in no manner at all posit such a thing?


[1979]
DE LTAR NI MA YIN TE, DE SKAD DU KUN GZHI YOD PAR BSTAN PAS ‘DUL BA RNAMS LA DE YOD PA NYID DU BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

In reply we can say that this is not the case; when works like this thus describe the existence of a foundation consciousness, it’s only that this presentation is being made to certain disciples.


[1980]
‘DIS NI DGOS PA’I DBANG GIS KUN GZHI GDUL BYA’I NGOR KHAS LEN PAR BSTAN PAS, RANG GI LUGS LA DGONGS PA CAN DU STON PA NA,

What this is meant to indicate is that the presentation where we seem to accept a foundation consciousness is only something made to certain disciples, with a specific special purpose in mind.  And what this means is that—according to what is actually our own position—this description is in fact figurative.


[1981]
GANG LA DGONGS NAS GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS GZHI NI, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA’I STONG PA NYID KHO NA LA DGONGS NAS, KUN GZHI RNAM SHES KYI SGRAS BSTAN PAR RIG PAR BYA’O,,

What is it our real intention to say, when we make such references?  What we only ever intend to refer to with these statements is emptiness: the fact that existence is devoid of anything that could exist through some nature of its own.  You should understand then that we are only using the expression “foundation consciousness” to say this very thing.


[1982]
[f. 148a] DE LA KUN GZHIR GSUNG BA NI, RANG BZHIN DE NI DNGOS PO THAMS CAD KYI RJES SU ZHUGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And why do we use here this specific wording, calling it “foundation” consciousness?  The point is that this nature follows upon each & every entity that exists.


[1983]
DGOS PA’I DBANG GIS KUN GZHI RNAM SHES YOD PAR STON PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, GANG ZAG KYANG RDZAS SU YOD PAR STON TE, DES ‘DUL BA’I SKYE BO LA DE YOD PAR BSTAN PAS RJES SU ‘DZIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And it’s not just foundation consciousness which is, figuratively, taught to exist.  There is also a teaching which says that the person can exist substantially; but only as a stratagem to attract disciples who might respond to such a presentation.


[1984]
JI SKAD DU DGE SLONG DAG PHUNG PO LNGA NI KHUR RO, ,KHUR ‘KHUR BA NI GANG ZAG GO ,ZHES GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

This presentation is reflected is reflected in statements from scripture such as:

O monks, the five parts to a person are the load.
And the one who carries this load is the person.


[1985]
‘DI NI GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS YOD DU ‘DZIN PA RNAMS KYIS ZHUS PA’I NGOR DE MED PAR MA BSTAN PAR KHUR ‘KHUR BA’I GANG ZAG YOD PAR GSUNGS PAS, TSIG LA DNGOS SU MED KYANG DON NI RDZAS YOD DO,,

This statement that there does exist a person who carries that particular load was presented to disciples who had requested a teaching and who were holding that there is a person who exists substantially, in a self-standing way.  As such, even though it is not included in the actual wording, the meaning is meant to refer to substantial existence.


[1986]
YANG GDUL BYA KHA CIG LA NI GANG ZAG RDZAS SU MED PA’I PHUNG PO TZAM ZHIG BSTAN PAR MDZAD DE, SEMS ZHES BYA BA’AM, YID CES BYA BA’AM, RNAM PAR SHES PA ZHES BYA BA DE NI DUS RING POR DAD PA DANG TSUL KHRIMS LA SOGS PAS YONGS SU BSGOS SHING, GONG DU ‘GRO BA NA PHYI MA LA MTHO RIS SU ‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES BSHAD PA’O,,

Lord Buddha also taught, to a certain number of disciples, the person as being only a collection of the parts to a person—but parts that did not exist substantially.  That is, he spoke about how what we call “the mind,” or what we call “the thoughts,” or else “consciousness,” has over a long period of time become completely imbued with attributes such as faith and ethical behavior.  And then this has led to the fact that the person moved up, and in their future lifetime came to the higher rebirths.


[1987]
‘DI YANG MTHO RIS DANG BYANG GROL DU ‘GRO BA’I TSUL LA BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA CAN RNAMS, JI TZAM ZHIG KHAS BLANG BAR BYA SNYAM PA LA, DE’I BDEN ZHEN GYIS YUL MA BKAG PAR PHUNG PO TZAM ZHIG YIN PAR BSTAN PA NA PHUNG PO BDEN PAR DON GYIS STON PA’O,,

This presentation was made for those who held that things existed in truth, as a method for travelling to the higher rebirths and liberation.  It incorporates an estimation of what they are able to accept; and so the person is described as being simply the parts to a person, without any refutation being made—at this point—about the objects that these students believe to exist in truth.  By implication, then, the teaching is saying that the parts to the person exist in truth.


[1988]
‘DI DAG THAMS CAD NI DGONGS PA’I DBANG GIS GSUNGS PA YIN NO,,

The fact though is that all these types of statements were made only figuratively.


	[1989]
[VI.43]
Evaṃ hi gambhīratarān padārthān
na vetti yas taṃ prati deśaneyam,
Astyālayaḥ pudgala eva cāsti
skandhā ime vā khalu kevalāś ca.

,KUN GZHI YOD CING GANG ZAG NYID YOD LA,
,PHUNG PO ‘DI DAG ‘BA’ ZHIG NYID YOD CES,
,BSTAN PA ‘DI NI DE LTAR CHES ZAB DON,
,RIG PAR MI ‘GYUR GANG YIN DE LA’O,,

	Statements as thus—
That there does exist
	One of the foundation,

	And there does exist
	A very essence of the person

	Which is only
	In and of these parts
	To the person—

	Were for those particular
	Ones who could not comprehend
	Extraordinarily deep points.


[1990]
‘DIR GDUL BYA GANG LA DGONGS TE GSUNGS PA YIN ZHE NA,

One might ask, at this point, “What particular disciples did Lord Buddha have in mind, when he made these kinds of statements?”


[1991]
DE’I LAN BRJOD PAR BYA STE, KUN GZHI RNAM [f. 148b] SHES YOD CING GANG ZAG NYID RDZAS SU YOD LA, PHUNG PO ‘DI DAG ‘BA’ ZHIG STE DE TZAM NYID BDEN PAR YOD CES BSTAN PA ‘DI NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR TE DE LTA BU’I CHES ZAB PA’I DON RE ZHIG RIG PA STE RTOGS PAR MI ‘GYUR BA’I GDUL BYA GANG YIN PA DE LA DGONGS TE GSUNGS SO,,

And then the verse here is a response to this inquiry.  Let’s consider this teaching, where Lord Buddha states that there does exist a foundation consciousness—and that the very essence of the person themselves is to exist substantially; where he says that the person is contained in and of these parts to the person: only just that, existing in truth.  What’s being said in our lines here is that the statement as we read it thus above here was made intended for those particular disciples who could not, for the time being, comprehend or realize the extraordinarily deep points of these matters.


[1992]
GDUL BYA GANG DAG YUN RING POR MU STEGS KYI LTA BA LA GOMS PAR BYAS PAS CHOS NYID ZAB MO LA ‘JUG PAR MI NUS SHING, RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,BDAG YOD MA YIN YOD MI ‘GYUR,
,BDAG GI YOD MIN MI ‘GYUR ZHES,
,BYIS PA DAG NI DE LTAR SKRAG

Those disciples who have become accustomed to the viewpoints of the River Schools over a long period of time find themselves unable to enter into the profound presentation of suchness.  And then we also have those lines from The String of Precious Jewels, where it says—

	There is no self,
	And there will be no self.

	There is nothing of the self,
	And neither will there be.

	Those who are infants
	Are terrified of these facts.


[1993]
,CES GSUNGS PA LTAR CHOS NYID THOG MAR BSTAN PA NA SKRAG NAS, SANGS RGYAS KYI BSTAN PA LA G-YANG SA DANG ‘DRA BAR SEMS PA DE DAG BSTAN PA LA RGYAB KYIS PHYOGS SHING MI ‘JUG PAS DON CHEN PO SGRUB PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

As this is pointing out, people will be terrified if—from the very beginning—we teach them the true nature of things.  They will perceive the teachings of the Buddha as if they were a high cliff that a person might fall from.  And then they turn away from those teachings, and refuse to enter into them.  As such there is no great meaning thus served.


[1994]
DE RNAMS LA CHES THOG MAR ZAB MO’I GNAS MTHAR THUG PA MA BSTAN PAR KUN GZHI RNAM SHES DANG, PHUNG PO BDEN PA SOGS BSTAN PAS NI DE LA BRTEN NAS MU STEGS KYI LUGS BSAL NAS,

If though from the very beginning we avoid teaching such people those most profound points—the ultimate points; and instead impart to them teachings about things like foundation consciousness, or parts to the person that exist in reality, they will be able to utilize these lessons to clear their minds of the systems of the River Schools.


[1995]
DE DAG GI DON CHEN PO ‘DREN PAR ‘GYUR ZHING PHYI NAS GSUNG RAB KYI DON LEGS PAR RIG PA RNAMS RANG NYID KYIS KUN GZHI LA SOGS PA YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA SPONG BAR ‘GYUR BAS, DE LTAR BSTAN PA LA YON TAN KHO NA ‘BYUNG GI SKYON NI MA YIN NO,,

By doing so, we lead them to a place of great meaning; and then later on they come to a good understanding of the meaning of the high words of the Buddha.  And then they are able—by themselves—to give up these types of viewpoints where, for example, they hold that there exists a foundation consciousness.  As such, only good things happen if we start out teaching them as we’ve described it here; and nothing untoward.


[1996]
RIM PA DE LTAR BYA BA LA DGONGS NAS BRGYA PA LAS,
,GANG ZHIG GANG GANG LA DGA’ BA,
,DE YI DE DE SNGAR SPYAD BYA,
,NYAMS PAR GYUR PA DAM CHOS KYI,
,SNOD NI CIS KYANG MA YIN NO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The 400 Verses has this graduated approach in mind when it says,

Let people start out doing
Whatever it is that they
Might first be attracted to;

When it fails them,
Why then wouldn’t they
Become worthy vessels
For the highest teachings of all?


[1997]
TSOGS DRUG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I KUN [f. 149a] GZHI BSTAN DGOS PA LA NI, PHYI ROL DGAG DGOS PAS GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS GZHAN GYIS STONG PA’I DE KHO NA NYID TZAM ZHIG GI SNOD DU RUNG LA,

Now to serve what purpose do we teach people that there is a foundation consciousness which is essentially separate from the collection of six different kinds of consciousness?  Our goal is to deny outside objects; and there are certain people who are worthy vessels only for the idea of suchness in the form of things being empty of any situation where the objects held by consciousness—and the consciousness which holds to them—could ever be such that to be one was not to be the other.


[1998]
SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI KUN GZHI RNAM SHES KHAS MA BLANGS KYANG, LAS ‘BRAS KYI ‘BREL PA ‘JOG SHES PA MIN PAS, CHES ZAB PA’I DON RIG PAR MI ‘GYUR BA LA GSUNGS PA YIN NO,,

That is, this is a teaching which is presented to those who will not be able to understand the very most profound presentation; since—as we described the situation above—they cannot grasp how to posit a connection between karma & its consequences if they do not accept a foundation consciousness.



On foundation consciousness, or not

[1999]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second step from above: the way in which a foundation consciousness essentially separate from consciousness of the thought is either explained, or not explained.


[2000]
SHER PHYIN ‘BUM PA SOGS MANG POR RNAM SHES KYI GRANGS STON PA NA, RNAM SHES TSOGS DRUG BSHAD KYI DE LAS MANG BA MA BSHAD PA’I MDO SDE DU MA ZHIG YOD PAS, MDO SDE LAS KUN GZHI RNAM SHES BZHAG MA BZHAG GI TSUL GNYIS BKA’ STZAL PA BZHIN DU,

In many sources such as the Perfection of Wisdom in 100,000 Lines, when they present the number of different types of consciousness, they describe only the collection of six different kinds of consciousness—and say nothing about there being more kinds than that.  There are many teachings in the collection of sutras like this; and so we can say that Lord Buddha described two different systems in the sutras here: one where he did describe a foundation consciousness, and one where he did not.


[2001]
RJE BTZUN BYAMS PAS KYANG DE DAG GI DON RNAM PAR ‘GREL BA NA, DBUS MTHA’ DANG MDO SDE RGYAN DANG, CHOS NYID RNAM ‘BYED DU KUN GZHI RNAM PAR BZHAG PA DANG PHYI ROL MED PA’I PHYOGS BSHAD LA, MNGON RTOGS RGYAN DANG, RGYUD BLA MA LAS KUN GZHI RNAM SHES RNAM PAR MA BZHAG PA DANG PHYI ROL MA BKAG PA’I PHYOGS BSHAD DO,,

And it was similar when the high & holy Loving One, Maitreya, commented upon these matters.  In Distinguishing between the Middle and the Extremes, and in the Jewel of the Sutras, and Distinguishing Things from the Very Nature of Things, he set forth the idea of a foundation consciousness, and described the position that there are no outer objects.  In the Jewel of Realizations and The Higher Line though, he did not set forth any foundation consciousness; and described a position which did not deny outer objects.


[2002]
SLOB DPON CHEN PO THOGS MED KYIS KYANG RGYUD BLA MA’I DGONGS PA RNAM RIG TZAM GYI LUGS SU YE MA BSHAD PAR, DBU MA’I LUGS SU BSHAD LA,

Neither did the great master Asanga say anything about the true intent of The Higher Line being the system of those who say it is all just awareness; rather, he glossed it as presenting the system of the Middle Way school.


[2003]
THEG BSDUS SU KUN GZHI RNAM SHES KYI SGRUB BYED DU DRANGS PA’I CHOS MNGON PA’I LUNG, RGYUD BLA MA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, SEMS CAN LA DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I KHAMS GRUB PA SNYING POR GYUR PA YOD MOD KYI, SEMS CAN DE DAG GIS SHES PA MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

In A Compendium of the Greater Way, we do see citations from teachings on higher knowledge used in support of the idea of foundation consciousness.  And in the commentary to The Higher Line we read:

It is said that, admittedly, living beings do possess what is the essence of attainment, the element of the Ones Gone Thus; but it is not something that they are even aware of.


[2004]
[f. 149b] DE SKAD DU,
,THOG MA MED PA’I DUS KYI KHAMS,
,CHOS RNAMS KUN GYI GNAS YIN TE,
,DE YOD PAS NA ‘GRO KUN DANG,
,MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA’ANG THOB PA YIN, 
ZHES SEMS CAN LA CHOS NYID KYI RIGS YOD PA’I SGRUB BYED DU DRANGS PAS,

We also see the following lines quoted in support of the idea that living beings do possess the nature of the very essence of all things:

It is an element
That has been there
For time with no beginning;

It is a place
Of all the things there are;

Because it is here,
We have all the different
Types of beings,

And can attain nirvana
As well.


[2005]
SLOB DPON ‘DIS KUN GZHI RNAM SHES KYI DGONGS GZHI STONG NYID DU BSHAD PA DANG MTHUN PA’I PHYIR, TSOGS DRUG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I KUN GZHI GDUL BYA ‘GA’ ZHIG GI NGOR, DGOS PA’I DBANG GIS GSUNGS PAR BZHED DO,,

This master explains the intent behind foundation consciousness as referring to emptiness; as such, it is his position that a foundation consciousness essentially separate from the collection of six types of consciousness was taught to a certain number of disciples, but intended only in a figurative sense.


[2006]
‘O NA BYANG CHUB SEMS ‘GREL DU,

“Well then,” you may ask.  “How do you interpret then the following statement from A Commentary on the Wish for Enlightenment which describes how it is foundation consciousness which takes us to another existence?”


	[2007]
,JI LTAR KHAB LONG DANG NYE BAS,
,LCAGS NI MYUR DU YONGS SU ‘KHOR,
,DE LA SEMS NI YOD MIN TE,
,SEMS DANG LDAN BZHIN SNANG BAR ‘GYUR,

The needle of a compass
Set close to a lodestone
Will quickly turn to face it;
Even though it has no mind,
It would seem as though it did.


	[2008]
,DE BZHIN KUN GZHI RNAM SHES NI,
,BDEN MIN BDEN PA BZHIN DU NI,
,GANG TSE ‘GRO ‘ONG G-YO BAR ‘GYUR,
,DE TSE SRID PA ‘DZIN PAR BYED,

Foundation consciousness
Is just the same;

Even though it is not real,
It seems as if it’s real,
As it shifts with coming & going,

And at that time it acts
For us to take existence.


	[2009]
,JI LTAR RGYA MTSO LA NI SHING,
,SEMS NI MED KYANG G-YO BAR ‘GYUR,
,DE BZHIN KUN GZHI RNAM SHES NI,
,LUS LA BRTEN NAS G-YO BA YIN,
ZHES KUN GZHI RNAM SHES KYIS SRID PA ‘DZIN PAR GSUNGS PA JI LTAR DRANG ZHE NA,

The ocean, and a tree,
May not have a mind,
But still they make to move.

Foundation consciousness
Is the same, as it shifts
All based on the body.


[2010]
DE NI SEMS LAS DON GZHAN PA’I PHYI ROL BKAG NAS SEMS TZAM ZHIG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MA BKAG PA’I SEMS TZAM GSUNGS PA NI, BYIS PA THAMS CAD STONG PAR BSTAN PA LA SKRAG PA SPANG BA’I PHYIR YIN GYI, NGES DON GYI DE NYID MIN PA DANG,

Let’s consider this statement, where we talk about a way in which things are mind only, in the sense of denying that there could exist external objects that were not part & parcel with the mind itself.  This description is made only with the intention of avoiding any panic that infants might feel when we describe emptiness; it is not though describing a nature of things which is meant to be taken literally.


[2011]
RNAL ‘BYOR SPYOD PA BA RNAMS KYIS GNAS GYUR PA’I SEMS KYI DAG PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA CIG, SO SO RANG GIS RIG PA’I SPYOD YUL DU GRUB PA KHAS BLANGS PA BKAG PA’I TSE,

Let’s consider the point at which we deny the position of those who belong to the school of deep practice, as they assert an adventitious purity of the mind which could exist through some nature of its own, and which could serve as the sphere of activity for the state of mind which could perceive itself, in the same moment that it perceives other objects.


[2012]
[f. 150a] SEMS BDEN PA MED NA ‘JIG RTEN SNGA MA NAS ‘DIR ‘ONG BA DANG, ‘DI NAS PHYI MAR ‘GRO BA’I G-YO BA’I BYA BA MI ‘THAD DO SNYAM PA’I RTZOD PA KHONG NA GNAS PA’I LAN DU,

They would say that—if the mind were indeed not something real—then the argument remains, where we consider it incorrect to say then that one could act to shift from the world they were in before, to this one; or to shift from this one to the next one.


[2013]
LCAGS DANG SHING LA SEMS MED KYANG YOD PA LTAR G-YO BA BZHIN DU, KUN GZHI BDEN PAR MED KYANG BDEN PAR YOD PA LTAR ‘GRO ‘ONG GI G-YO BA DANG BCAS PAR SNANG NGO, ZHES STON PA YIN PAS GZHUNG GZHAN NAS BSHAD PA LTAR GYI KUN GZHI RNAM SHES RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA KHAS LEN PA NI MIN NO,,

And then what’s being indicated here is that—even though foundation consciousness is not something that exists in truth—it can appear to be involved with the shifts of going & coming as if it did exist in truth; it’s just like the way that the iron or a tree could shift here & there, as if they had a mind, despite the fact that they do not.  As such, it is not that in this case a kind of foundation consciousness is—as we see it described in other texts—being accepted as existing by definition.


[2014]
GAL TE KUN GZHI RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR KHAS MI LEN KYANG, TSOGS DRUG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I SGYU MA LTA BU KUN BYANG GI CHOS KUN GYI SA BON THAMS CAD PA KHAS LEN NO SNYAM NA,

Which may lead one to the following thought—

Even if it is the case that foundation consciousness is not being accepted here as something which could exist by definition, don’t we still accept it as something that is essentially separate from the combination of six kinds of consciousness; as being like an illusion; and as the combination of all the seeds there are?


[2015]
DE ‘DRA BA’I KUN GZHI KHAS LEN NA KUN GZHI’I BAG CHAGS SMIN PA LAS GZUGS SGRA SOGS SU SNANG BA TZAM DU ZAD KYI, PHYI ROL GYI DON MED PAR KHAS BLANG DGOS NA, DE NYID LAS,

If we were to accept a foundation consciousness like the one you have described, then we would have to agree to the idea that there exist no outer objects; we would have to say that things like visible form, and sounds, were nothing but phantoms appearing out of the ripening of deep seeds inside of foundation consciousness.  And then it would be as the same work describes it:


	[2016]
,SHES PAS SHES BYA RTOGS PA STE,
,SHES BYA MED PAR SHES PA MED,
,DE LTA NA NI RIG BYA DANG,
,RIG BYED MED CES CIS MI ‘DOD,

	Awareness perceives
	Something to be aware of;
	If there is nothing
	To be aware of, then
	There is no awareness.

	As such, why would anyone
	Disagree with the idea
	That there is nothing
	To be known, and
	Nothing to know it?


[2017]
,CES PHYI’I SHES BYA DANG NANG GI SHES PA GNYIS YOD MED MTSUNGS PAS GCIG MED NA CIG SHOS MED PAR GSUNGS LA,

What this is saying is that outer objects to be aware of, and the inner awareness of these objects, are equal in that either they both exist, or they both don’t exist.  If one is absent, then the other is absent.


[2018]
‘DI NI GZHUNG ‘DIR DON SHES GNYIS DON DAM DU MED MNYAM DANG THA SNYAD DU YOD MNYAM YIN PAS, BDEN GNYIS GANG DU YANG DE GNYIS LA YOD MED KYI KHYAD PAR ‘BYED PA MI ‘THAD PAR GSUNGS PA DANG KHYAD MED PAS NA, PHYI ROL MED PA’I SHES PA YOD PA SLOB DPON GYI BZHED PA MIN NO,,

This point in the context of the current work is that object and awareness are equivalent in not existing in any ultimate way; and they are equivalent in existing nominally.  This is no different than the statement that—whichever of the two realities we are talking about—it would be incorrect to draw a distinction between them, as to whether they exist or do not.  As such, it is not something that the Master would accept to say that there could be an awareness devoid of an outer world.


[2019]
DE’I PHYIR YID KYI SHES [f. 150b] PA LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I KUN GZHI MI BZHED PAS KUN GZHI ZHES GSUNGS PA NI, SPYIR SEMS RIG CING GSAL TZAM LA KUN GZHIR BZHAG PA DANG, KHYAD PAR DU YID KYI SHES PA LA YIN TE,

As such, neither would he agree to the idea of a foundation consciousness which was essentially separate from the awareness of the thought.  And so when we use the expression “foundation,” we can say in general that the mind itself—this simple knowing and clearness—is itself the foundation; and, more particularly, the awareness of our thoughts is.


[2020]
SEMS SPYI TZAM RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA BKAG PA’I LAN DU, SEMS BDEN PAR MED PA LA BYA BYED RUNG BA’I TSUL YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, SRID PAR SKYE BA ‘DZIN PA’I SEMS YID SHES YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, YID KYI SHES PA NI KUN NAS NYON MONGS DANG RNAM BYANG THAMS CAD KYI GZHI YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

That is, as we reply by denying that the mind in general could exist through any nature of its own, we are describing a way in which all the workings of things is something completely consistent with the idea of a mind which cannot exist in truth; and where the mind that takes a new birth in the cycle of pain is our awareness of our thoughts; and how our awareness of our thoughts is the foundation of everything there is, in both the side of life which is entirely negative, and the side which is totally enlightened.


[2021]
DBU MA SNYING POR YANG KUN GZHI SGRA JI BZHIN PA BKAG LA, SLOB DPON YE SHES SNYING PO YANG, PHYI ROL BZHED PAS KUN GZHI MI BZHED DO,,

In Heart of the Middle Way, a foundation consciousness which is taken literally is denied; Master Jnanagarbha too accepts the idea of outer objects, and thus does not accept the concept of a foundation consciousness.


[2022]
PHYI ROL GYI DON ‘GOG PA’I SEMS TZAM PA LA YANG KUN GZHI RNAM SHES ‘DOD MI ‘DOD GNYIS SNANG LA, PHYI ROL GYI DON MI BZHED PA’I SLOB DPON K’A MA LA SH’I LAS KYANG, YID KYI BLO KHO NA NI SKYE BA GZHAN DANG NYING MTSAMS SBYOR BA’I NUS PA CAN YIN NO,,

Even among those of the Mind Only school who deny outer objects, there appear to be two groups: those who accept the idea of a foundation consciousness, and those who do not.  Even Master Kamalashila, who denies the existence of outer objects, says that the mind in the sense of thought itself is an entity which possesses the capacity to take us over the border to a next life.


[2023]
JI SKAD DU YANG,
,CHAD DANG MTSAMS SBYOR ‘DOD CHAGS BRAL,
,NYAMS DANG ‘CHI ‘PHO SKYE BA NI,
,YID KYI RNAM SHES KHO NAR ‘DOD,
CES MDZOD LAS GSUNGS PA DRANGS PAS, SLOB DPON CHEN PO ZHI ‘TSO YANG KUN GZHI RNAM SHES MI BZHED PAR GSAL LO,,

It is evident as well that the great master Shanta Rakshita denies the concept of a foundation consciousness, as he quotes the following lines from The Treasure House:

Severing, reconnecting,
Freedom from desire,
Degenerating,
Dying and moving on,

And rebirth too
Are accepted as being
Only consciousness
Of the thought.


[2024]
AA BHY’A {%BHA Y’A} KA RA YANG DE DANG ‘DRA’O,,

Master Abhayakara’s position is the same.


[2025]
THEG PA CHEN PO’I GSUNG RAB GZHAN DU KUN GZHI RNAM SHES ZHES GSUNGS PA YANG, MING TZAM MA RTOGS PA NGOS ‘DZIN GSAL BAR MI SNANG LA, DON LA DPYAD PA TSOGS DRUG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA MI BZHED PA KHO NAR SNANG ZHING, LUGS DE YANG PHYI ROL KHAS [f. 151a] LEN PA’I PHYOGS SU SNANG BAS YID KYI RNAM SHES LA MING DE LTAR BTAGS PA’O,,

In other works of the greater way, we do see the expression “foundation consciousness” used; but except for the name itself, there doesn’t appear to be any clear identification of what this refers to.  In actual fact as well, all we do see are refusals to accept the position that there could exist a consciousness by this name which was essentially distinct from the collection of six types of consciousness.  These systems too would appear to be ones in which outer objects were accepted; as such, the expression “foundation consciousness” itself would appear to be just something applied to the consciousness of the thought.


[2026]
‘DI RNAMS RGYAS PAR GTAN LA ‘BEBS DGOS MOD KYANG MANGS PAS ‘JIGS NAS MA BRIS SO,,

We really should pause here to nail down these points in detail; but I have not written more here because I fear that our work would then go on too long!



Just like me & mine

[2027]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third step here: the presentation of a metaphor to demonstrate that statements in regard to foundation consciousness were only figurative.


	[2028]
[VI.44]
Ahaṃ mametyeva yathā dideśa
satkāya dṛṣṭer vigame’pi Buddhaḥ,
Tathā’svabhāvān api sarva bhāvān
astīti neyārthatayā dideśa.

‘JIG TSOGS LTA DANG BRAL YANG
SANGS RGYAS KYIS,
,JI LTAR NGA DANG NGA YI BSTAN PA LTAR,
,DE BZHIN DNGOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN MED MOD KYI,
,YOD CES DRANG DON NYID DU BSTAN PA YIN,

	It’s like how
The Buddha is free
	From the view
	Of the destructible collection,

	But did still give teachings
	Using “me” and “mine.”

	This is a similar case:
	Things admittedly have
No nature of their own,

And yet only
In a figurative sense
It was stated
That things did exist.


[2029]
GDUL BYA GZHUG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DANG PO KUN GZHI RNAM SHES LA SOGS PA BSTAN PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, ‘ON KYANG JI LTAR TE DPER NA ’JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA BAG CHAGS DANG BCAS PA DANG BRAL BAS, 

Concepts like foundation consciousness are presented at first only for the purpose of inducing disciples to enter the teachings.  But in the end it’s like, for example, the case with the point at which we free ourselves from the view of the destructible collection, along with the deep seeds for this view.


[2030]
NGA DANG NGA YIR ‘DZIN PA’I RTOG PA THAMS CAD SPANGS KYANG, NGA DANG NGA YI ZHES BSNYAD PA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS CHOS KYI DON KHONG DU CHUD PA’I THABS YIN PA’I PHYIR,

That is, at this point we have been able to eliminate all of those ideas where we hold to a “me,” or to a “mine.”  But speaking still of “me” or “mine”—using these terms—can be employed as a means of helping people of the everyday world to begin to grasp the meaning of the teachings.


[2031]
SANGS RGYAS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS NGA DANG NGA YI ZHES JI SKAD BSTAN PA DE BZHIN DU, DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED MOD KYI STE KYANG, RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD CES DRANG DON NYID DU BSTAN PA NI, ‘JIG RTEN GYI RIM GYIS DE KHO NA NYID KHONG DU CHUD PA’I THABS YIN NO,,

As such, the Conqueror—the Buddha—did give teachings using the expressions “me” and “mine.”  It’s a similar case with the way in which things admittedly have no manner of existing though some nature of their own, and yet only in a figurative sense it was stated that things did exist through just such a nature.  It was only meant as a stratagem for getting those of the world to begin to grasp, very gradually, the way things really are.


[2032]
BSDU NA NGA ZHES PA DANG NGA YI’O ZHES GSUNG PA LTAR NA, DE DANG DE’I RTOG PA YOD PA LTAR SNANG NA’ANG, RTOG PA MED PA NGES DON YIN PA 

To sum then, it’s similar to when statements were made about “me” or “mine”—and the idea we had about them felt as though they referred to something real.  But the actual case was that these ideas never applied to anything real at all.


[2033]
BZHIN DU CHOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR STON PA DE SANGS RGYAS KYI DGONGS PA LTAR SNANG YANG CHOS RNAMS DE LTAR MED PA DE NGES PA’I DON NO ZHES PA’O,,

In the same way, it would appear that Lord Buddha’s intention was to indicate that things existed through some nature of their own; but what he really meant to say was that things didn’t exist that way at all.


[2034]
THA SNYAD KYI RNAM GZHAG ‘JIG RTEN DANG MTHUN PAR ‘JUG TSUL YANG SHAR GYI RI BO’I SDE PA DANG MTHUN PA’I TSIGS SU BCAD PA LAS

This idea, of applying terms in a way which fits the way in which the world uses them, is described for example at length in the following verses, which are written in keeping with the position of those who belong to East Mountain Group:


	[2035]
,GAL TE ‘JIG RTEN RNAM ‘DREN RNAMS,
,’JIG RTEN MTHUN PAR MI ‘JUG NA,
,SANGS RGYAS CHOS NYID [f. 151b] GANG YIN DANG,
,SANGS RGYAS SUS KYANG SHES MI ‘GYUR,

If that Ultimate Guide of the World
Were not to try to fit the world,

It would be a sign that none of the Buddhas
Really understood the teachings
That the Buddhas themselves have taught.


	[2036]
,PHUNG PO DAG DANG KHAMS RNAMS DANG,
,SKYE MCHED RANG BZHIN GCIG BZHED LA,
,KHAMS GSUM PO DAG STON MDZAD PA,
,’DI NI ‘JIG RTEN MTHUN ‘JUG YIN,

They teach the position
That the parts to the person,

And the categories and
The doors of sense
All have a single nature;

And when they undertake
To teach the three realms,

They do it in keeping
With the way of the world.


	[2037]
,MING MED PA YI CHOS KYI RNAMS,
,BSAM PA MED PAS MING DAG GIS,
,SEMS CAN RNAMS LA YONGS BRJOD PA,
,’DI NI ‘JIG RTEN MTHUN ‘JUG YIN,

The nature of all things
Devoid of names, as they are,
Is beyond all thought;

And so using names
To describe them to
The people of the world

Is only in keeping
With the way of the world.


	[2038]
,DNGOS MED NYE BAR STON MDZAD CING,
,SANGS RGYAS RANG BZHIN LA BZHUGS PAS,
,DNGOS MED ‘GA’ YANG ‘DIR MED PA,
,’DI NI ‘JIG RTEN MTHUN ‘JUG YIN,

They undertake to teach
Things that have no reality,
And the Buddhas reside
In a nature to things;

But there is nothing here
With no reality;
It is only in keeping
With the way of the world.


	[2039]
,DON DANG DON MED MI GZIGS LA,
,’GOG PA DANG NI DAM PA’I DON,
,SMRA BA RNAMS KYI MCHOG GSUNG BA,
,’DI NI ‘JIG RTEN MTHUN ‘JUG YIN,

They see neither that
Which is actually there,
Nor that which is not.

Everything that the highest
Of all the teachers there is
Ever said about stopping
And the highest thing of all

Is only in keeping
With the way of the world.


	[2040]
,ZHIG PA MED CING SKYE MED LA,
,CHOS KYI DBYINGS DANG MNYAM GYUR KYANG,
,SREG PA’I BSKAL PA STON MDZAD PA,
,’DI NI ‘JIG RTEN MTHUN ‘JUG YIN,

The fact that nothing stops
And nothing starts
Is all in keeping with
The empty realm of things;

And yet they give teachings
About the eon of fire—
Only in keeping
With the way of the world.


	[2041]
,DUS GSUM DAG TU SEMS CAN GYI,
,RANG BZHIN DMIGS PA MA YIN LA,
,SEMS CAN KHAMS KYANG STON MDZAD PA,
,’DI NI ‘JIG RTEN MTHUN ‘JUG YIN,
ZHES RGYA CHER GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

No nature of a living being
Ever existed
In the past, or present, or future;

And yet they undertake
To teach about
Some quality of beings—

It is all only in keeping
With the way of the world.


[2042]
DE RNAMS KYI SHLO KA THA MAS SEMS CAN RANG BZHIN MED PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED DANG, LHAG MA RNAMS KYIS DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS MED KYI CHOS RANG BZHIN MED PA’I CHOS KYI BDAG MED BSTAN LA,

The last of the verses we’ve given here is referring to the fact that the person has no nature of being itself: the fact that beings have no nature of their own.   The rest of the verses are saying that neither entities which perform a function, nor those which do not, have any nature of their own; that is, they are referring to the fact that things have no nature of their own.


[2043]
SHAR RI’I SDE PA NI DGE ‘DUN PHAL CHEN PA LAS RIM GYIS GYES PA YIN PAR RTOG GE ‘BAR BA LAS BSHAD PAS NA, NYAN THOS KYI SDE SNOD DU CHOS RANG BZHIN MED PA SHIN TU GSAL BAR STON PA CIG YOD PAR SNANG NGO,,

Now the Blaze of Reasoning explains that the East Mountain Group, over time, split off from the Majority Group; as such, it seems to me that there actually is a party in the listener section of the teachings where they teach, quite explicitly, the lack of a self-nature to things.



Mind Only on the sixth level

[2044]
[f. 152a] GNYIS PA SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS BYE BRAG TU DGAG PA LA GSUM, PHYI ROL MED PA’I SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DGAG ,GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SGRUB BYED TSAD MA DGAG ,SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA’I TZAM GYI SGRAS PHYI DON ‘GOG PA MIN PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

This brings us, at last, to the second section in showing how we disprove the position that things can grow from something other than themselves; that is, a more specific denial of this point by the Mind Only school.  Here we have three parts: a denial that the understanding that there are no outer objects could ever exist through some nature of its own; denying the accurate perception which is supposed to prove that dominated things exist through some nature of their own; and a demonstration that the word “only” in the expression “Mind Only” is not meant to deny outer objects.


[2045]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, GZHAN LUGS BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O,,

The first of these parts has two points of its own: describing the position that others take, and then denying that position.


	[2046]
[VI.45]
Prajñā vihārī sa hi bodhisattvo
vijñāna mātra pratividdha tattvaḥ,
Grāhyaṃ vinā grāhakatām apaśyan
vijñāna mātraṃ tribhavaṃ paraiti.

,GZUNG BA MED PAR ‘DZIN PA MA MTHONG ZHING,
,SRID GSUM RNAM SHES TZAM DU RAB RTOGS PAS,
,SHES RAB LA GNAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ DES,
,RNAM SHES TZAM DU DE NYID RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR,

	They see there are no
	Objects of perception;

	And they see none
	Which act to hold
	To these—

		They come to a deep
		Realization that all three
		Realms of existence
		Are only consciousness itself.

		A bodhisattva who
		Is staying in wisdom
		Comes to a realization

		Of that real nature of things:
		That they are only consciousness.
		

[2047]
DANG PO NI, RNAM PAR SHES PA SMRA BA DBU MA PA’I LUGS JI SKAD BSTAN PA MI BZOD CING, RGYAL BA’I DGONGS PA MIN PAS, RANG GI RNAM RTOG GIS SBYAR BA’I LUGS BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS DON ‘JOG PAR BYED PA RNAMS KYIS, RANG GI GZHUNG LAS JI SKAD DU BSHAD PA’I LUGS GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR PHYOGS SNGA MA SMRAS PA,

Here is the first.  Those who assert that everything is consciousness cannot bear the position that those of the Middle Way describe, and say that it is not what the Victors really mean.  Rather, these people seek to establish how things actually are by expressing a position which is just a creation of their own imagination.  And so in an attempt to clarify the system presented in their own classical texts, they begin with the following opening statement.


[2048]
SHES RAB KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA LHAG PA LA GNAS PA STE BZHUGS NAS DE NYID SGOM PAR BYED PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ SA DRUG PA BA DES, RIGS PA GANG GIS DE KHO NA NYID PHYIN CI MA LOG PA DANG, GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD DU LHAG PAR SGRO MA BTAGS PAR RTOGS PA DANG MTHONG BA DANG, KHONG DU CHUD PA NI DE NYID RTOGS PA STE, RNAM PAR SHES PA TZAM DU DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR ZHES RNAM PAR SBYAR RO,,

Let’s consider first then a bodhisattva who is at the sixth bodhisattva level, who is staying in—that is, who has entered—a very special form of the perfection of wisdom, and is undertaking to meditate upon the way things really are.  There is a reasoning that they employ to come to an unmistaken realization of suchness, and to overcome every tendency to exaggerate things wildly by holding that objects of awareness—and the forms of awareness which hold to them—could ever be such that to be one was not to be the other.  To see these truths, and to truly embody them, they come to a realization of that real nature of things, that they are only consciousness.  


[2049]
DE YANG PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS MED PAS SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG RNAMS KYANG PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS TE DON MED PAR RTEN ‘BYUNG GI DNGOS PO TZAM DU RTOGS PA’I PHYIR, RNAM SHES TZAM DU DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA ZHES BYA’O,,

And so they would say that we must come to realize that—since there is no outer physical form—mind and mental functions in turn have no objects, no physical form on the outside.  That is, we must realize that they are nothing more than creations of dependence.  And so it is that they speak of “realizing the way things really are, as being nothing more than awareness.”


[2050]
YANG JI LTAR BYANG SEMS ‘DIS DE KHO NA NYID DE LTAR RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,

And how is it, then, that this bodhisattva comes to perceive the real nature of things as being this way?


[2051]
GANG GI PHYIR BYANG SEMS [f. 152b] ‘DIS NANG GI BAG CHAGS SMIN PA LAS GZUGS SOGS ‘BYUNG BAR ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA’I RIGS PAS SEMS LA RANG LAS RDZAS GZHAN GYI GZUNG BA MED PAR DE LAS DON GZHAN PA’I DE ‘DZIN PAR BYED PA MA MTHONG ZHING, SRID PA KHAMS GSUM PO NI RNAM PAR SHES PA TZAM MO ZHES RAB TU RTOGS PAS TE NAS,

The bodhisattva utilizes reasoning—which we are about to explain—to understand how physical form and the like come into being through the ripening of deep seeds inside of themselves; which is to say, this logic allows them to understand how there are no objects of perception which are such that to be them is not to be the mind itself.  They see no entities which act to hold to these objects and are separate from them.  And so—which is to say, first—they come to a deep realization that all three realms of existence are only consciousness itself.


[2052]
GNYIS STONG GI DE KHO NA NYID LA YUN RING POR GOMS PAR BYED LA, DE GOMS PA LAS KYANG SGRAS DE KHO NA NYID DU BRJOD DU MED PA’I DNGOS PO STE GNYIS STONG GI NGO PO {%BO} TZAM ZHIG RANG RIG PAS MNGON SUM DU MTHONG STE, DE’I PHYIR SNGON DU GOMS PA’I RIM PA ‘DIS SA DRUG PA BAS RNAM SHES TZAM DU DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And then they undertake to accustom themselves, for a long period of time, to suchness in the form of things being empty of this particular duality.  With that, they use apperception to see, directly, how things are nothing more than this essential nature of being devoid of that duality; that is, they use the familiarity they have developed to see that nature of things which cannot be described, precisely, in words.  And so a bodhisattva at the sixth bodhisattva level—one who has up to this point gone through the stages of accustoming themselves to these concepts—is able to realize the true nature of things: that they are nothing but awareness itself.


	[2053]
[VI.46]
Yathā taraṅgā mahato’mburāśeḥ
samīraṇa preraṇayodbhavanti,
Tathālayākhyād api sarva bījād
vijñāna mātraṃ bhavati svaśakteḥ.

,JI LTAR RLUNG GIS [f. 206b] BSKUL BAS RGYA MTSO NI,
,CHE LAS CHU RLABS ‘BYUNG BA DE BZHIN DU,
,KUN GYI SA BON KUN GZHI ZHES BYA LAS,
,RANG GI NUS PAS RNAM SHES TZAM ZHIG ‘BYUNG,

	It’s like the great ocean,
	Instigated by the winds [f. 206b];

	And from there
	The waves occur.

	Just so do we have
	What we call
	“The all-foundation”

	For the deep seeds
	Of everything;

	And from that arise
	What is nothing more
	Than consciousness,

	Through energies
	Concordant with them.


[2054]
GAL TE ‘DI DAG PHYI ROL MED PA’I RNAM PAR RIG PA TZAM YIN NA, ‘O NA ‘DIR PHYI ROL MED PAR DE’I RNAM PA CAN GYI SEMS TZAM JI LTAR SKYE BAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,

One might return then with the following question: “Suppose then it is the case that things are nothing more than awareness, and there are no outer objects.  How is it though that the mind alone can grow, in these particular forms?”


[2055]
SMRAS PA JI LTAR TE DPER NA RLABS KYI RTEN DU GYUR PA’I RGYA MTSO CHEN PO NI, RLUNG GIS BSKUL BA STE KUN NAS BSKYOD PA LAS, SNGAR GNYID LOG PA LTA BU’I MI G-YO BAR GNAS PA LAS CHU’I RLABS RNAMS ‘GREN PA’I SGO NAS BDAG GI LUS RNYED PA LTAR, YONGS SU RGYUG PAR RTOGS PA

Here then is our answer.  It’s like, for example, the great ocean, which acts as a basis for the formation of waves.  This ocean is instigated by the winds—it is stirred up by them, completely—and from there it’s like a person who up to this time has been asleep, and is then stirred.  Which is to say, the waves are led forth; the man rediscovers his body; and he perceives himself running here and there throughout the day.


[2056]
DE BZHIN DU PHYI NANG GI DNGOS PO KUN GYI SA BON KUN GZHI RNAM SHES ZHES BYA BA LAS, CHAGS SOGS DANG DAD SOGS ‘GAG BZHIN PAS RANG DANG RJES SU MTHUN PA’I NUS PA KUN GZHI LA BZHAG PA’I BAG CHAGS SMIN PA LAS MA DAG PA’I GZHAN DBANG RNAM SHES TZAM ZHIG ‘BYUNG BA

Just so do we have what we call “foundation consciousness”: the all-foundation for the deep seeds of every inner & outer entity.  From it come forth things like attachment & such; and faith & the like.  As they come to a stop, they leave deep seeds deposited in the foundation consciousness: energies concordant with their various natures.  As these seeds ripen, things which are nothing more than consciousness arise from that: impure forms of dominated entitites.


[2057]
DE NYID LA, BYIS PA RNAMS GZUNG BA DANG ‘DZIN PA PHYI NANG DU RGYANGS CHAD PAR ‘DZIN PA’I TSUL [f. 153a] GYIS RTOG PAR BYED KYI RNAM SHES LAS RDZAS THA DAD PA’I GZUNG BA NI CUNG ZAD KYANG YOD PA MIN NO,,

Infants look upon what is nothing more than this, grasping to objects and subjects, imagining that they are inner & outer entities existing from a distance.  But in actual fact there is not the slightest trace of any object there which is not such that to be it is to be the consciousness itself.


[2058]
‘DI NI DPER NA DBANG PHYUG LA SOGS PA RGYUR SMRA PA RNAMS,
,BA NI BA SGRA RNAMS KYI RGYU,
,CHU SHEL CHU RNAMS KYI BZHIN DANG,
,BLAG SHA YAL GA RNAMS KYI LTAR,
,DE NI LUS CAN KUN GYI RGYU,

To this point, we can take for example statements by those who say that the Lord of Power or such are the cause behind all the things there are:

	Cows are the cause
	Behind the mooing of cows;

	And just so water crystal
	Behind all the kinds of water.

	Trees are behind
	The branches of trees;

	Just so, he is the cause
	Behind every living being.


[2059]
ZHES DBANG PHYUG LA SOGS PA ‘GRO BA’I BYED PA POR SMRA BA BZHIN DU, KUN GZHI RNAM SHES SMRA BA RNAMS KYANG RNAM SHES DMIGS PA’I DNGOS PO MTHA’ DAG GI RTEN NYID KYIS SA BON THAMS CAD PA SMRA BAR BYED DO,,

That is, it’s being asserted that the Lord of Power—or someone like him—was the creator of living beings.  Just so, those who profess a foundation consciousness say that consciousness is the one & only basis of all the entities in existence.  As such, they say that it is the combination of all the deep seeds there are.


[2060]
GANG DBANG PHYUG RTAG LA KUN GZHI RNAM SHES MI RTAG GO ZHES BYA BA ‘DI NI KHYAD PAR RO,,

There is a difference here though, where people say that the Lord of Power is never-changing, while foundation consciousness is ever-changing.


[2061]
DE’I PHYIR TSE RABS GZHAN MANG POR MU STEGS KYI LTA BA GOMS PA RNAMS NI KUN GZHI BSHAD PAS ‘DUL BA YIN NO,,

Thus it is that those who have accustomed themselves to the viewpoints of the River Schools over a long string of many previous lifetimes can be tamed with the description of a foundation consciousness.


[2062]
‘O NA ‘GREL PAR SEMS TZAM PA’I ‘DOD PA BRJOD PA NA, PHYI ROL MED CES PA MANG DU GSUNGS SHING, RNAM PAR SHES PA LAS THA DAD PAR GYUR PA’I GZUNG BA NI CUNG ZAD KYANG YOD PA MIN ZHES,

The following thought may occur to some:

When, in the autocommentary, they describe the beliefs of the Mind Only school, we see the expression “there are no outer objects” repeated frequently.  Or people say, “There is not the slightest object, anywhere, which is separate from consciousness.”


[2063]
GZUGS SOGS KYI GZUNG BA MED PA LA RNAM SHES LAS THA DAD PA’I ZHES KHYAD PAR SMOS PA DANG, DBANG PO GZUGS CAN MIG CES BYA BAR RTOGS ZHES PA’I

That is, when they say that there are no objects of perception, such as form or the rest, they add the qualification “which are things separate from consciousness.”  Or they say things like “we realize that it’s the physical sense power of the eye.”


[2064]
‘GREL PA LAS, RNAM PAR SHES PA LAS THA DAD PA’I MIG GI DBANG PO NI YOD PA MA YIN NO, ZHES DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR SNGAR LTAR SBYAR BA BZHIN 

And then the autocommentary at this point applies a qualification, such as we noted before, to what we deny here: “There is no such thing as a power of the eye which is separate from consciousness.”


[2065]
SEMS TZAM GYI SKABS SU ‘DOD RGYU YIN NAM, ‘ON TE GZUGS SOGS LNGA DANG DBANG PO GZUGS CAN LNGA MED CES KHYAD PAR MA SBYAR BAR KHAS BLANG RGYU YIN SNYAM NA,

And so our question is, are these kinds of statements reflecting ideas that would be accepted in the context of the Mind Only school?  Or are we to accept these ideas without qualifications such as “devoid of form and the rest of the five” or “devoid of the five physical powers”?


[2066]
‘GREL PA [f. 153b] ‘DIR KHYAD PAR SBYAR MA SBYAR GNYIS KA ‘DUG KYANG, SKYE BA ‘GOG PA LA DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA MANG DU BYUNG NA, MA BYUNG BA’I SKABS THAMS CAD DU YANG DE ‘KHYER BA BZHIN DU, ‘DIR YANG DE LTAR BYA STE, ‘DIR PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA’I GZHUNG THEG BSDUS SU,

In the autocommentary at this point we see both kinds of references: where they make qualifications of this kind, or where they do not.  In the end though it’s like cases where we deny that things can grow: there are many situations where qualifications are added to what we deny; and where such qualifications are not made, we are expected to assume them nonetheless.  We should do the same here; as we see the previous position described in the classic Summary of the Greater Way—


[2067]
CI’I PHYIR LEN PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA ZHES BYA ZHE NA, DBANG PO GZUGS CAN THAMS CAD KYI RGYU YIN PA DANG, LUS THAMS CAD NYE BAR LEN PA’I GNAS SU GYUR PA’I PHYIR TE, ‘DI LTAR TSE JI SRID PAR RJES SU ‘JUG GI BAR DU DES DBANG PO GZUGS CAN LNGA PO DAG MA ZHIG PAR NYE BAR BZUNG BA DANG, ZHES DANG,

And why do we call it “the consciousness taken”?  The point is that it is the cause of all the powers that have form, and it acts as something taken on with all the bodies there are.  That is, it continues on for as long as the person continues to live; and takes on the five physical sense powers until such time as they come to an end.


[2068]
THUN MONG NI SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI SA BON GANG YIN PA’O, ,THUN MONG MA YIN PA DE NI SO SO RANG GI SKYE MCHED KYI SA BON GANG YIN PA’O, ,THUN MONG GANG YIN PA DE NI TSOR BA MED PA ‘BYUNG BA’I SA BON NO, 

It is that thing which is the seed for the vessel of the world, that all of us share.  It is that thing which is the seed for those things which are not shared: for the doors of sense of different individuals.  It is the seed for those things which occur that are shared, but which do not exhibit sensation.


[2069]
ZHES KUN GZHI’I STENG GI SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI SA BON TSOR BA MED PA’I DNGOS PO’I SA BON DU GSUNGS PA DANG, BSDU BA LAS KYANG DE BZHIN DU GSUNGS SHING,

What this is talking about is seeds for the vessel of the greater world in general; these are being referred to as “seeds for things without sensation.”  The same sorts of statements are found in The Summary.


[2070]
RTEN ‘BREL MDO ‘GREL DU, KUN GZHI RNAMS KYI RKYEN GYIS MING GZUGS ‘GRUB PAR BSHAD PA’I MING PHUNG PO LHAG MA BZHI DANG, GZUGS ‘BYUNG BA ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR GYI GZUGS LA ‘CHAD CING, DE ‘DRA DE GZUGS MED NA MED KYANG KHAMS GZHAN GNYIS NA YOD PAR BSHAD PA SOGS SEMS TZAM GYI LUGS LA GZUGS KHAS LEN PA MTHA’ YAS PA CIG SNANG NGO,,

The commentary to the Sutra on Interdependence speaks of how the factor of foundation consciousness brings about the link of name & form; this latter is explaned as referring to “name” in the sense of the remaining four parts to the person, and to “form” in the sense of form composed either of the elements themselves, or the products of the elements.  This kind of thing is explained as something that does not occur in the formless realm, but which does exist in the other two realms.  It would appear that—with these and other such ideas—there are almost an infinite number of special positions, in the Mind Only school, relating to form.


[2071]
DE LTA MA YIN NA SEMS TZAM GYI SKABS SU GZUGS PHUNG GI STENG NAS, DE LTAR GZUGS SGRA SOGS THA [f. 154a] SNYAD MDZAD PA THAMS CAD LA, GSAR DU MA BCOS PA THA SNYAD BTAGS PA DE NYID KYIS THA SNYAD BYED DU MI RUNG BA KHO NAR ‘GYUR BAR SNANG LA, DE ‘DRA BA’I THA SNYAD BYAR MI RUNG BAR MTHONG YANG DA DUNG GRUB MTHA’ ‘DI LEGS SO ZHES PA NI ‘PHAGS YUL GYI SANGS RGYAS PA SU LA YANG MI SNANG NGO,,

If it were not this way, it would appear that in the context of the Mind Only school we would have the following problem.  That is—in every case where we used the terms “visible form” or “sound”—it would always be inappropriate to apply the terms in this specific way of their not being created fresh.  We can see that it would be inappropriate to apply terms in this way; and yet to continue to insist then that “This is a really great system” is something that we would never see any follower of Buddhism in the Land of the Realized Ones do.


[2072]
SHES BYA NANG GIR SMRA BA ZHES PA’I MING DON KYANG SHES BYA NI GZUGS SGRA SOGS YIN LA, DE PHYI ROL TU MI ‘DOD KYI NANG SHES PA’I DNGOS POR SMRA BA LA ZER BA YIN NO,,

There is a name that is used here: “those who say knowable things are inner.”  The expression “knowable things” in this case refers to objects like visible form and sounds.  And the name is meant to apply to those who deny that these things could be outside of us; who say that, rather, they are entities on the inside, consisting of mind.


[2073]
GAL TE SEMS TZAM PAS GZUGS SGRA SOGS KHAS LEN NA, DE PHYI ROL YIN PA ‘GOG PA MING TZAM LA RTZOD PAR ‘GYUR TE, PHYI ROL TU SNANG BA’I GZUGS SOGS ‘DI NYID LA PHYI ROL TU ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

One may come then with the following question:

Since those of the Mind Only school accept things like visible form and sound, then if they go and deny that these are outside objects, it’s all just arguing about names.  The fact is that when physical form appears to be on the outside, then that is exactly what allows us to say that it is on the outside.


[2074]
‘DI DANG DBU MA PAS GZUGS SOGS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA BKAG NAS GZUGS SOGS ‘JOG PA LA, RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PAR SNANG BA’I GZUGS SOGS ‘DI NYID RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR, DE YOD MED LA RTZOD PA MED LA RTZOD PA’O ZHES PA DANG ‘DRA STE,

This argument would be similar to talking about those who belong to the Middle Way school in the following way:

These thinkers deny that form and the rest could ever exist by definition; but when they do posit the existence of form and the like, they are talking about form and such which appear to exist by definition—and so they must be saying that these things exist in fact by definition.  And so when they debate about whether these things exist this way or not, they are debating, literally, about nothing.


[2075]
GRUB MTHA’ GNYIS KA’I DKA’ GNAS CHEN POR SNANG BAS, DBU MA’I TSUL DKA’ BAR MA ZAD SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS ‘DI LA YANG, PHYI ROL BKAG NA GZUGS SOGS KYANG MED PAR ‘GRO ZHING, GZUGS SOGS BZHAG NA PHYI ROL YANG BZHAG DGOS PAR MTHONG BAR ‘DUG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This would appear to be a point of great difficulty in both of these schools of thought; as such, it’s not just that the system of the Middle Way is something difficult—there is also this point in the tradition of the Mind Only.  That is, if we deny the existence of outer objects, then form and the rest would also have to be things that did not exist; whereas if we do posit things such as form and so on, we can see that we would have to posit them as things with an outside existence.


[2076]
‘DI DAG DKA’ MOD KYANG MANGS BAS ‘JIGS NAS MA BRIS SO,,

And so yes, I admit that these are quite difficult points; but I shall not write further on them here, for I fear that my text would go on much too long.


	[2077]
[VI.47]
Saṃvidyate’taḥ paratantra rūpaṃ
 prajñapti sad vastu nibandhanaṃ yat,
Bāhyaṃ vinā grāhyam udeti sac ca
sarva prapañcāviṣaya svarūpam.

[VI.47a]
,DE PHYIR GZHAN GYI DBANG GI NGO BO GANG,
,DNGOS PO BTAGS PAR YOD PA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR ZHING,

	Therefore an essential nature
	To dominated things
	
	Is the cause for things
	Which exist only as
	They are given these names.


[2078]
GANG GI PHYIR GSUNG RAB KYI RNAM PAR BZHAG [f. 154b] PA NI SNGAR BSHAD PA ‘DI YIN PAR GRAGS PA DE’I PHYIR GZHAN GYI DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I NGO BO GANG YIN PA ‘DI NI GDON MI ZA BAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA STE, GANG GI PHYIR GZUNG ‘DZIN GYI DNGOS PO BTAGS PAR YOD PA STE RDZAS THA DAD DU YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA SOGS KYI RTOG PA’I DRA BA MA LUS PA’I RGYU STE GZHIR ‘GYUR BAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The presentation of the teachings we have made then is known to be as we have described it; and therefore the idea that an essential nature to dominated things which exists through some quality of its own is something that—beyond any shadow of a doubt—we must accept.  And why is this the case?  Because we accept the idea that things like objects of perception and the corresponding perceiving subjects exist only as things that are given these names; and that to hold them as being such that to be one is not automatically to be the other is the cause—which is to say, the foundation—of this entire trap of conceptual thought.


[2079]
THAG PA’I RGYU MTSAN CAN GYI SBRUL DU ‘KHRUL BA NI THAG PA MED PA’I GZHIR MI SKYE LA, BUM PA LA SOGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN CAN GYI ‘KHRUL PA NI, SA LA SOGS PA MED PA’I NAM MKHA’I PHYOGS SU SKYE BAR MI ‘GYUR BA BZHIN DU, PHYI ROL GYI DON MED NA SNGON PO LA SOGS PA PHYI ROL TU ‘KHRUL BA’I RTOG PA ‘KHRUL GZHI JI ‘DRA BA ZHIG GI RGYU CAN DU ‘GYUR,

Mistaking a rope as a snake due to the proximity of the rope is not something that ever occurs in a location where there is no rope.  And a perceptual error founded in a water pitcher or the like is not something that would ever arise in the middle of the sky, where there are no elements of earth or the like.  The case here is just the same; that is, if there are no outer objects, then what would be the cause behind a perception which mistakenly took blue or the like as existing on the outside?  How could the circumstances that allowed the error be present?


[2080]
DE’I  PHYIR GDON MI ZA BAR PHYI ROL TU ‘KHRUL BA’I RTOG PA’I RGYU GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD PA GNYIS SU SNANG BA’I MA DAG GZHAN DBANG KHAS BLANG DGOS TE, SNANG GZHI DE NYID KUN BYANG GI ‘CHING GROL GNYIS KA’I RGYU YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As such, we must—beyond the slightest doubt—accept the concept of an impure form of dominated entities, where the objects held and the perceptions holding them do appear to be such that to be one is not to be the other; that is, there must be some basis for the mistaken perception that outer objects exist.  We can even say that the very scenario which appears to us is the exact cause behind the fetters and the freedom, of vast negativity and perfect enlightenment.


[2081]
DBU SEMS GANG GI LUGS KYIS KYANG DE LTA SEMS CAN RNAMS LA SNANG ZHING, SNANG BA LTAR DU BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I ZHE NA {%ZHEN} GZHI DE, ZHEN YUL DES STONG PAR BSTAN PA CIG YOD NA, STONG NYID DE RTOGS PA LAM DU ‘GRO BA YIN GYI,

It doesn’t matter which system we’re talking about—that of the Middle Way, or that of the Mind Only.  In either case, there is a basis behind our wrong belief: something that appears to living beings to exist in a certain way, and which they subsequently believe to exist in truth, as it appears to.  If there is something that we can point to as being empty of the object that people believe they see, then—and only then—the realization of that sheer absence or emptiness can function as a path.


[2082]
SEMS CAN RANG DGA’ BA RNAMS KYIS BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I ZHEN YUL SUN PHYUNG BA’I STONG NYID RTOGS PA LAM DU MI BYED PAR STONG PA GZHAN CIG BDEN PAR SGRUB PA NI, THOG MA MED PA NAS ZHUGS PA’I BDEN ZHEN PHRA RAGS GANG GI YANG GNYEN POR MI ‘GRO BAS [f. 155a] NGAL BA ‘BRAS MED DO,,

And suppose we fail to make a path out of coming to a realization of emptiness—an emptiness where we have overthrown that object of belief: the belief of just normal people of the world that things exist in reality.  That is, suppose we take some other kind of emptiness to exist, really.  This could never serve as an antidote for either one of the forms—more subtle, or more coarse—of the belief in something real which has resided in the hearts of beings for time with no beginning.  And as such, the whole exercise would be one in futility.


[2083]
DE LTAR NA GNYIS SU SNANG BA’I GZHAN DBANG GANG LA GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD PA SNANG BA BZHIN DU, YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA’I ZHEN YUL GYI KUN BRTAGS GANG MED PA DE NI, GZHI DE DGAG BYA DES STONG PAR YANG DAG PAR RJES SU MTHONG LA,

There is then the appearance of duality: that what our perceptions are holding, and the perceptions themselves, are not such that to be one is to be the other.  Just so, there is the fact of the absence of that imaginary thing whose existence we crave for, and hold on to.  And so there comes a day when we are able to see, perfectly, how the vista we are considering is empty of this thing which was never there.


[2084]
STONG GZHI DANG STONG PA GANG ZHIG ‘DIR LHAG MAR LUS PAR GYUR PA DE, ‘DI NA BDEN PAR YOD PA YIN NO, ZHES YANG DAG PA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU RAB TU SHES PAS ‘DI NI STONG PA NYID KYI DON KYANG LEGS PAR GZUNG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If there is anything left over after you consider what has the emptiness, and the emptiness itself, then—as they say—“here is what exists in truth.”  That is, when we really understand the way things are, perfectly, then we are also grasping, with excellence, what is really meant when we say “emptiness.”


[2085]
‘DIR PHYOGS SNGAR MDZAD PA NI BYANG SA DANG DBUS MTHA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, GANG LA GANG MED PA ZHES SOGS KYI DON SNGAR LTAR BSHAD PA DE YIN LA, RGYUD BLA MA’I ‘GREL PAR GANG ZHIG GANG NA MED PA DE NI ZHES SOGS KYI DON BKRAL BA NI, SNGA MA GNYIS DANG GTAN MI ‘DRA BAR DBU MA’I ‘GREL TSUL DU YOD DE MANGS PAS ‘JIGS NAS MA BRIS SO,,

What I have presented here as the initial position represents what we described earlier, as reflected in the explanation of the wording that we see in both The Levels of the Bodhisattva and in the commentary to Distinguishing Between the Middle & the Extremes: “with what it is that what is missing.”  The way though in which the commentary to The Higher Line reads the phrase “where it is that something is missing” is completely different from that found in these other two.  Which is to say, there are a great number of different ways that the Middle Way explains these things.  Out of a concern though that I would go on too long, I will refrain from speaking more on that point here.


	[2086]
[VI.47b]
,PHYI ROL GZUNG BA MED PAR ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR LA,
,YOD DANG SPROS KUN YUL MIN RANG BZHIN YOD,

	They occur in a lack
	Of outer objects
	Which are grasped;
	
	And they exist,
	And have a nature,

	Never objects of
Any elaboration.


[2087]
GZHAN DBANG DE NI PHYI ROL GYI GZUNG BA MED PAR RANG GI BAG CHAGS KHO NA LAS ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR LA, RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA DANG ‘DI’I LUGS KYI DON DAM PAR SGRA RTOG GI SPROS PA KUN TE THAMS CAD KYI YUL MIN PA’I RANG BZHIN CAN DU YOD DE, PHYI NANG GI MNGON PAR BRJOD PA NI DNGOS SU MA BRTAGS PA’I RNAM PA ‘DZIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Dominated entities lack any outer objects which are grasped; they are things that occur only from their deep seeds.  And they exist through their own nature and—as being ultimate, in this system—they have a nature where they can never be objects of any, of all, elaboration of word & thought.  And so they retain an aspect where they are not direct formulations of outer or inner expression.


[2088]
MDOR NA GZHAN DBANG LA KHYAD PAR GSUM YOD DE, PHYI ROL MED PAR ‘BYUNG BA DANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA DANG, DON DAM PAR SPROS PA YIN NO COG GI YUL MA YIN PA’O,,

To put it briefly, dominated entitities have three different distinct characteristics: they occur without existing on the outside; the exist through a nature of their own; and they exist ultimately, without ever being any of the many different kinds of elaboration there could be.


[2089]
BRTAG PAR YOD PA’I RGYU NI RANG BZHIN GYIS [f. 155b] YOD PA’I DNGOS PO’I KHONGS SU ‘DU BAS DE NI KHYAD PAR GSUM PO LAS THA MI DAD DO,,

Being a cause that exists as a formulation is something that is included into being an entity which exists through its own nature; as such, we don’t list it separately from the three characteristics just mentioned.


[2090]
GZHAN DBANG YOD CES PA NI YOD TZAM MIN GYI YOD PA KHYAD PAR BA YIN TE, SLOB DPON BLO BRTAN GYIS, YANG DAG MA YIN KUN RTOG YOD, CES BYA BA GSUNGS TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS ZHES BYA BA TSIG GI LHAG MA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR YIN PAS, KHYAD PAR ‘DI NGES PA ‘OG TU GAL CHE’O,,

When we say that dominated entities exist, we are not just talking about simple existence; rather, this is a special form of existence.  This then is why Master Sthiramati says,

As they say, “It is not pure; it is imaginary”—and there are some additional words to be added here, “through a nature of its own.”

As such, distinguishing this particular feature will be crucial as we go on below.



Denying the dream

[2091]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, DGAG PA RGYAS PAR BRJOD PA DANG, DE LTAR BKAG PA’I MJUG BSDU BA’O,,

Here secondly we present a more specific denial of the explanation of this point by the Mind Only school.  This we will do in two parts: an expanded description of our denial; and then a summary of just such a denial.


[2092]
DANG PO LA GSUM, PHYI ROL MED PA’I SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I DPE DGAG ,BAG CHAGS KYI NUS PA LAS DON GYIS STONG PA’I SHES PA SKYE BA’I DON DGAG ,DE LTAR BKAG PA DANG MI SDUG PA SGOM PA GNYIS MI ‘GAL BAR BSTAN PA’O,,

The expanded description has three sections of its own: denying a metaphor which is meant to show that awareness where there are no outer objects could exist through some nature of its own; denying the referent of the metaphor in a case where awareness arises from the power of a deep seed, and is empty of the referent; and finally a demonstration that there is no contradiction between this particular denial, and the meditation on the repulsive.


[2093]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, RMI LAM GYI DPE DGAG PA, SKRA SHAD MTHONG BA’I DPE DGAG PA’O,,

The first section comes in two steps of its own: denying the metaphor of a dream; and denying the metaphor of seeing a strand of hair.


[2094]
DANG PO LA GSUM, RMI LAM GYI DPES SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MI ‘GRUB PA, RMI LAM GYI DPES SAD DUS SU PHYI ROL MED PA MI ‘GRUB PA, RMI LAM GYI DPES DNGOS PO THAMS CAD BRDZUN PAR ‘GRUB PA’O,,

And then finally the first of these steps has three points: how it is that the metaphor of a dream fails to establish that awareness exists through some nature of its own; how it is that the metaphor of a dream fails to establish the idea that, when we awake, there are no outer objects; and finally establishing—through the metaphor of a dream—that all entities are deceptive.


	[2095]
[VI.48]
Vinaiva bāhyaṃ kva yathāsti cittaṃ
svapne yathā ced idam eva cintyam,
Svapne’pi me naiva hi cittam asti
yadā tadā nāsti nidarśanaṃ te.

,PHYI ROL MED SEMS DPE NI GANG DU YOD,
,RMI LAM JI BZHIN ZHE NA DE BSAM BYA,
,GANG TSE NGA LA RMI LAM NA YANG SEMS,
,YOD MIN DE TSE KHYOD KYI DPE YOD MIN,

		Where then is
		The metaphor for
		A mind where there
		Are no outer objects?

		Suppose you say
		It is the same
		As a dream—
		We need to consider this.

		Suppose that—
		Even just in a dream—
		There’s a mind;

		In ours there is
		No such existence:
		You would have no
		Metaphor that existed.


[2096]
DANG PO NI, SEMS TZAM PA KHYED PHYI ROL MED LA, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I SEMS YOD PAR ‘DOD NA, DPER NA ‘DI BZHIN ZHES ‘DI’I DPE NI GANG DU YOD CES ‘DI NYID DPYAD PAR BYA’O,,

Here is the first.  Suppose that you proponents of the Mind Only school assert that there are no outer objects; but that there does exist a mind which exists by definition.  In that case, we need to examine this point more closely; we want you to tell us, “It’s like this particular metaphor.”  Where then is the metaphor you think there might be for this?


[2097]
SEMS TZAM PAS SMRAS PA, DPER NA KHANG MIG SHIN TU CHUNG NGU’I NANG DU NYAL ZHING, GNYID KYIS LOG PAS GLANG PO CHE MYOS PA’I KHYU RMIS PA’I GLANG PO CHE NI, KHANG MIG DER JI [f. 156a] LTAR YANG YOD PA MIN TE,

To this, those of the Mind Only school reply—

As a metaphor, we can point to a person who is sleeping in a very small room.  They fall into a deep sleep, and dream about an entire herd of crazed elephants.  The fact is that an elephant like this could never be present in that particular room.


[2098]
DE’I PHYIR RMI LAM JI LTA BA BZHIN DU PHYI ROL GYI YUL MED BZHIN DU, RNAM SHES RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘DI NGES PAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’O ZHE NA, ‘DI YANG SNYING PO MED PA NYID DU BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA, DPE DE NYID ‘DIR BSAM PA STE DPYAD PAR BYA’O,,

Suppose then you say that the case here is just the same as a dream, where no outer objects exist; and so we must definitely accept the idea that awareness exists through some nature of its own.  Since this is something described to indicate how nothing has any essence of its own, we need to consider this very metaphor here, in our case—we need to examine it.


[2099]
YANG DPYAD PAR BYA BA DE CI ZHIG CE NA, GANG GI TSE RMI LAM NA YANG BA LANG MYOS PA’I KHYU’I RNAM PA CAN GYI SEMS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA DE NI, YUL GLANG PO CHE MED PA LTAR NGA’I LUGS LA YOD PA MIN TE, MA SKYES PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And how should this examination proceed?  Suppose that—even just in a dream—we have a state of mind that exists by definition, and which is holding the image of a herd of crazed elephants.  Here in our system too there is no such existence; it never started, just as the object mentioned—the elephants—never existed.


[2100]
RNAM SHES RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED NA, DE’I TSE GNYIS KA LA GRUB PA’I KHYED KYI DPE YOD PA MIN PAS, PHYI ROL MED PAR RNAM PAR SHES PA YOD PA MIN NO,,

But suppose that there is no such thing as a consciousness which could exist by definition.  In that case, you would have no metaphor that existed here which was valid for both parties.  And as such, there could be no awareness that existed without outer objects.


[2101]
‘DIR RMI LAM NA SNANG BA’I GLANG PO CHE MED PA BZHIN DU YUL CAN SHES PA YANG MED PAR STON PA NI MIN GYI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SHES PA MED PAR STON PA LA NGES PAR ‘DOD DGOS TE,

This is not a demonstration that—just as an elephant which appears in a dream cannot be something which exists—an awareness which holds an object cannot exist either.  Rather, we have to agree that it is indicating how there exists no awareness which could exist through some nature of its own.


[2102]
SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR SEMS TZAM PAS PHYI ROL MED PA’I GZHAN DBANG KHAS BLANGS PA NI, GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG,

And so let’s consider this assertion by the Mind Only that—as we described it earlier—there do exist dominated entitites where there are no outer objects.  It goes back to the idea that dominated entities exist through some nature of their own.  


[2103]
DGAG PA ‘DI RNAMS KYIS DON BSDUR, MDOR NA JI LTAR SHES BYA MED DE BZHIN, ,BLO YANG MED, CES PA’I ‘GREL PAR SHES BYA’I RNAM PA CAN GYI BLO YANG RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS MA SKYES PAR RIG PAR BYA’O, ZHES GSAL BAR GSUNGS SHING,

And so to summarize these various denials, we can quote a clear reference in the autocommentary to the lines that say, “To put it briefly, there are no knowable things; and no mind either.”  This reference says—

You should understand that a state of mind holding the image of existing things does not arise by its very own self either.


[2104]
GZHAN YANG RTZA ‘GREL GNYIS SU ‘DI ‘DRA’I RIGS ‘GOG PA’I TSE, DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA DU MA ZHIG YOD PA’I PHYIR [f. 156b] DANG, SLAR YANG DE LAS BDAG NYID CHEN POS SEMS, ,MA RIG LAS LAS SKYES PAR CI PHYIR GSUNGS, ZHES MA RIG PAS ‘DU BYED ‘DU BYED KYIS RNAM SHES SKYED PAR GSUNGS PA RANG GI’ANG LUGS YIN PA’I PHYIR NA, RNAM SHES MED PA ‘DI’I LUGS SU SMRA BA LA NI RTOG LDAN LA DOGS PA’I GNAS MED DO,,

Our reasoning above is further supported by the fact that—when, in both the root text and the autocommentary the Master denies this type of reasoning—there are many examples where qualifications are placed upon the object that we deny with emptiness.  And we do see as well that part in the root text which says—

…And then how
Could it be in it
For the Great Being
To state that the mind

Was born from
Dark ignorance
And karma?

That is, the statement that misunderstanding triggers fresh karma, and then fresh karma in turn triggers consciousness, also represents our own system.  As such, nobody with good understanding would entertain the suspicion that people in the school we’re discussing here would assert that there was no consciousness.


[2105]
DE’I PHYIR SHES BYA DANG SHES PA LA YOD MED MGO MTSUNGS MDZAD PA THAMS CAD NI DGAG BYA’I KHYAD PAR GYI STENG NAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

As such, you should understand that all the cases in which knowable things and the mind that knows them are stated to be equivalent—in either existing or not existing—are made with reference to distinctions in what we deny when we speak of emptiness.


[2106]
CI STE RMI LAM NA RNAM PAR SHES PA ‘KHRUL PA MED NA, DE’I SAD PAS RMI LAM GYI DUS GYI NYAMS SU MYONG BA PHYIS DRAN PAR MI ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NA,

At this point, the following thought might then occur to one:

If there exists no mistaken awareness within a dream, then when we wake from the dream we shouldn’t be able to remember—later on—what we experienced during the dream.


[2107]
‘DI NI SHES PA RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED NA, SHES PA YE MED PAR BSAMS PA’I RTZOD PA’O,,

This is an argument based on thinking that—if awareness is not something that exists through some essential nature of its own—then it cannot exist at all.


	[2108]
[VI.49]
Svapnasya bodhe smaraṇān mano’sti
yadyastu bāhyo viṣayo’pi tadvat,
Yathā mayā dṛṣṭam iti smṛtis te
bāhye ‘pi tadvat smṛti sambhavo’sti.

,GAL TE SAD TSE RMI LAM DRAN LAS YID,
,YOD NA PHYI ROL YUL YANG DE BZHIN ‘GYUR,
,JI LTAR KHYOD KYI NGAS MTHONG SNYAM DRAN PA,
,DE ‘DRA PHYI ROL LA YANG YOD PA YIN,

	Suppose that,
	When we wake,
	We remember the dream;
	And our mind existed.

	From that then
	Outside objects
	Would be just so.

	It follows from this—
	The memory where
	You think to yourself,
	“I saw something”;

	And moreover
	Such things existed
	As outside.


[2109]
DE LTAR RTZOD PA ‘DI YANG MI RUNG STE, GAL TE GNYID SAD PA’I TSE RMI LAM GYI NYAMS SU MYONG BA DRAN PA LAS, RMI LAM GYI YID RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YOD NA, RMI LAM GYI GLANG PO CHE LA SOGS PA PHYI ROL TU SNANG BA’I YUL YANG YID DE BZHIN DU YOD PAR ‘GYUR TE,

And making this kind of argument is, further, incorrect, for the following reason.  Suppose that—when we have woken from a dream—we remember what we experienced in the dream.  And then suppose further that our mind in the dream existed through some nature of its own.  In that case, from our remembering then, things like the elephant in the dream would also become just as that state of mind dictated: they would exist as objects appearing in the outside world.


[2110]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, JI LTAR KHYOD KYI SAD PA’I TSE NGAS RMI LAM GYI DUS SU MTHONG SNYAM PA’I YUL CAN GYI DRAN PA YOD PA LAS YID YOD PA DE BZHIN DU, RMI LAM GYI TSE YUL ‘DI MTHONG SNYAM PA’I YUL MYONG DE ‘DRA BA PHYI ROL TE YUL LA YANG DRAN PA YOD PAS, YUL YANG YOD PA’AM YANG NA RNAM SHES KYANG YOD PA MIN NO ZHES KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’O,,

And why would that be the case?  It follows from this.  The fact is that there is a state of mind that comes from the presence of the memory that holds to a certain object; that is, when you wake from the dream, you think to yourself, “During the dream, I saw certain things.”  Following that, we can say that during the dream itself there were certain objects about which you thought, “I am seeing this”; that is, you have an experience of these objects, and you moreover recall such things as being outside objects.  And so we would have to say that those objects did exist; otherwise, there would be no such consciousness of them.  All this is something that you would have to accept.


[2111]
‘O NA RMI LAM GYI YUL DANG YUL CAN DRAN PA RANG LUGS LA YANG YOD PAS, DE GNYIS YOD MED JI LTAR BYA ZHE NA,

“Well then,” one may ask, “remembering both the subject and the object in a dream is something that can also be found in your own system.  So do you say that those two exist, or do not exist?”


[2112]
‘DIR ‘GREL PAR RMI [f. 157a] LAM GYI MYONG BA DRAN PA DANG, RMI LAM GYI YUL NYAMS SU MYONG BA DRAN PA GNYIS BSHAD PAS, RMI LAM GYI SKABS SU GLANG PO CHE LA SOGS PA SNANG BA NA, DPER NA BYAD BZHIN GYI GZUGS BRNYAN MTHONG BA NA DE SNANG BA’I MIG SHES KYIS BYAD BZHIN MYONG BA MIN KYANG, GZUGS BRNYAN LA LTOS PA’I YUL MYONG YOD PA BZHIN DU, RMI LAM GYI TSE YANG GLANG PO CHE MYONG BA’I YUL MYONG MED KYANG, DER SNANG BA’I YUL MYONG YOD PAS YUL DRAN ZER YANG YUL DE MYONG BA DRAN PA’O,,

On this point, the autocommentary describes two different types of remembering: one, a memory of the experience of the dream; and two, a memory of experiencing objects within the dream.  And so suppose that an elephant or the like appears during a dream.  It’s like for example when we see a reflection of an object in a mirror.  It’s not that the visual consciousness which assumes that form is experiencing the object standing in front of the mirror; rather, it is having an experience of an object due to the reflection.  The case with a dream is similar; even though at this point there is no experience of a elephant as the object, there has been an experience of an object appearing as an elephant.  As such, when we say “I remember a certain object,” we are actually remembering the experience of that object.


[2113]
DMIGS MYONG SO SOR ‘BYED PA NI SKABS ‘GA’ ZHIG MA GTOGS PA ‘DI ‘DRA BA MANG PO ZHIG LA MI DGOS SO,,

This idea of distinguishing between an object and an experience is something that we need to do only in a few specific cases; it’s not as though you would need to call on it frequently.


[2114]
DE LTAR NA PHYI ROL GYIS STONG PA’I GZHAN DBANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA NI ‘JOG PAR MI NUS TE, DNGOS KYI DPE YANG MI SRID LA SKYE BA SNGA PHYI YOD PAR SGRUB PA LTA BU LA DNGOS KYI DPE MED KYANG, SBYOR BA’I ‘GOD TSUL GZHAN GYIS SGRUB PA LTA BU’I DPE YANG ‘DI LA MED PAS, SEMS TZAM PA ‘GOG PA NI RIGS PA SHIN TU STOBS CHE BAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And so thus we can say that there is no way one could establish the existence of dominated entitites that exist by definition and are devoid of objects existing on the outside.  There is no outright example of this possibility; and whereas—in the case of proving the existence of past & future lives, there is no outright example either, but we can establish it by other means, such as by positing a logical proof based on a metaphor—there is nothing like that here in this case.  As such, you should understand that the denial of the Mind Only position is an extremely powerful expression of logic.



The failure of the dream

[2115]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: how it is that the metaphor of a dream fails to establish the idea that, when we awake, there are no outer objects.


	[2116]
[VI.50]
Cakṣur dhiyaḥ sambhava eva middhe
nāstyasti vai mānasam eva cetaḥ,
Tad ākṛtau bāhyatayā niveśaḥ
svapne yathehāpi tathā mataṃ cet.

,GAL TE GNYID NANG MIG BLO MI SRID PAS,
,YOD MIN YID KYI SHES PA KHO NA YOD,
,DE YI RNAM PA PHYI ROL NYID DU ZHEN,
,RMI LAM JI LTA DE BZHIN ‘DIR ‘DOD NA,

		If, in our sleep,
		The mind of vision
		Is impossible,

		Then those are not
		Something; rather,
		All that is present is
		The awareness of our thoughts.

		We are attached to
		An aspect of it;
		The outside world itself.

		Suppose you accept that
		It’s just the same here
		As the way in a dream.


[2117]
GAL TE GLANG PO CHE LA SOGS PA’I GZUGS RMI LAM NA YOD NA, DE ‘DZIN PA’I MIG SHES KYANG RMI LAM NA YOD PAR ‘GYUR NA DE NI MI RIGS TE, GNYID LOG PA NA GNYID KYIS DKRUGS PA LA MIG GI BLO STE SHES PA MI SRID PAS, GLANG PO CHE LA SOGS PA’I GZUGS MIG GI SKYE MCHED KYIS GZUNG BAR BYA BA YOD PA MIN LA, YID KYI SHES PA KHO NA YOD DO,,

It’s not logical to say that—if the form of an elephant or something similar were to exist in a dream—then there must also be a visual consciousness present in the dream.  In our sleep, our minds are disturbed by the sleep; and so it is impossible for there to be “the mind of vision”; which is to say, visual consciousness.  As such, the fact is that the visual form of the elephant or whatever it may be is not something which is held by the sense door of the eyes.  Rather, all that is present is the awareness of our thoughts.


[2118]
DE’I PHYIR PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED MED PA KHO NA YIN ZHING, YID KYI RNAM [f. 157b] PAR SHES PA LA PHYI ROL DE’I RNAM PA SNANG BA TZAM LA PHYI ROL NYID DU MNGON PAR ZHEN PA NI BZLOG TU MED PAR ‘BYUNG NGO,,

As such, an outer door of visible form can only be something which does not exist.  And what’s happening is that we are strongly attached to thinking that the awareness of the thought is an aspect of the outer world—that something which is nothing more than the appearance of being outside is the outside world itself.  This attachment occurs in a very compelling way that is difficult to reverse.


[2119]
RMI LAM DU PHYI ROL MED PAR RNAM PAR SHES PA TZAM ‘BYUNG BA JI LTA BA DE BZHIN DU, SAD PA’I SKABS ‘DIR ‘DOD DO ZHE NA,

So suppose then that you say that things are just the way that they happen in a dream; and there is only consciousness going on, without any outer objects.  Suppose you say you accept that things here—referring to the hours of our waking life—are just the same.


[2120]
‘DI NI SNGAR GYI DPE DE MA GRUB TU CHUG KYANG RMI LAM GYI DPES SAD PA’I SKABS SU PHYI ROL MED PA’I RNAM SHES ‘GRUB BO SNYAM PA’O,,

It would appear that—in these lines—it is being allowed that the previous metaphor was not successful, but at the same time there is an assertion that the metaphor of a dream works to establish the fact that, when we awake, there is present a consciousness which has no outer objects.


[2121]
DE NI MA YIN TE RMI LAM DU YID KYI RNAM SHES ‘BYUNG BA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA NI, RMI LAM DU GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED MED DU CHUG KYANG, DA {%DE} MED PA’I YID KYI RNAM SHES RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA RMI LAM NA’ANG MI SRID PAS, PHYI ROL MED PA DANG YID SHES RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA GNYIS TSOGS PA DE DPER MI RUNG ZHES PA’O,,

And then we have a statement that this is not the way it is; that it’s impossible for consciousness of the thoughts to occur within a dream.  What this is saying is that—even if we accede the point that there is no door of sense of visible form in a dream—it is further the case that in a dream it is impossible for there to exist a consciousness of the thoughts which indeed has no such door, and which exists through some nature of its own.  As such, it’s being said, it is inappropriate to offer this metaphor to illustrate the combination of there being no outer objects, and the awareness of our thoughts existing through some nature of its own.


	[2122]
[VI.51]
Bāhyo yathā te viṣayo na jātaḥ
svapne tathā naiva mano’pi jātam,
Cakṣuś ca cakṣur viṣayaś ca taj jaṃ
cittaṃ ca sarvaṃ trayam apyalīkam.


,JI LTAR KHYOD KYI PHYI YUL RMI LAM DU,
,MA SKYES DE BZHIN YID KYANG SKYES MA YIN,
,MIG DANG MIG GI YUL DANG DES SKYED SEMS,
,GSUM PO THAMS CAD KYANG NI BRDZUN PA YIN,

		Just the way you say
		Outside objects never start
		In a dream,

		The thought too,
		In the same manner,
		Never starts.

		The eye and
		The object of the eye,
		And the state of mind
		Triggered by them—

		All three—
Are also deceptive.		


[2123]
‘DI LTAR JI LTAR KHYOD KYI LTAR NA PHYI ROL GYI YUL TE DON RMI LAM DU MA SKYES PA DE BZHIN DU, YID KYI RNAM SHES KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYES PA MA YIN NO,,

It’s just the way that you say it is: objects that are on the outside are similar to things in a dream—they never start.  In the same manner, consciousness of the thought too never starts through any nature of its own.


[2124]
DE’I PHYIR JI LTAR SAD PA’I TSE GZUGS MTHONG BA NA, MIG DANG GZUGS DANG YID GSUM PO ‘DUS PA DE BZHIN DU, RMI LAM DU YANG YUL YONGS SU GCOD PA NA GSUM ‘DUS PAR BLOS DMIGS PA YIN NO,,

And so we can point to how we see forms when we are awake; the three of the eye, visual form, and the thought come together.  In a dream, the perception is accomplished by the mind, as the three assemble even in the exclusion of the object.


[2125]
JI LTAR RMI LAM DER MIG DANG MIG GI YUL GZUGS GNYIS MED PA DE BZHIN DU, DE GNYIS KYIS BSKYED PA’I SEMS MIG GI RNAM SHES KYANG YOD PA YANG MA YIN PAS, RMI LAM GYI MIG GZUGS YID GSUM PO THAMS CAD KYANG NI BRDZUN PA YIN NO,,

In a dream, these two are absent: the eye and the form which serves as the object of the eye.  Just so, the state of mind which is triggered by these two—the visual awareness—is something that is missing.  As such, all three of these, in a dream, are also deceptive: the eye, the form, and the thought.


	[2126]
[VI.52]
Śrotrādiśeṣaṃ trayam apy ajātaṃ
svapne yathehāpi tathā prabodhe,
Mṛṣā padārthā na tad asti cittaṃ
na gocaraḥ santi ca nendriyāṇi.

	[VI.52a]
,RNA SOGS LHAG MA GSUM PO’ANG SKYE BA MED,

	The extra three
	For the ear and so on
	Also have no growing.
	

[2127]
GSUM PO DE BZHIN DU RNA BA SOGS MIG GI GSUM GYI LHAG MA GSUM PO’ANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED [f. 158a] DO,,

In the same way as these three, the ear sense power and so on—the extra three on top of the three for the eye—are also things that have no growing through any nature of their own.


[2128]
‘DIR SOGS PA’I SGRAS NI SGRA DANG RNA BA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA NAS YID DANG CHOS KYI KHAMS DANG YID KYI RNAM PAR SHES PA’I BAR BSDU’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I RNA BA’I DBANG PO NAS LUS DBANG GI BAR BZHI DANG, SGRA’I NAS REG BYA’I SKYE MCHED KYI BAR BZHI DANG, RNA BA’I RNAM SHES SOGS BZHI NI

Here, “the phrase ‘and so on’ is meant to include everything from sound and the consciousness of the ear up to the thought, and the category of things, and the consciousness of the thought.”  What this is referring to is the four from the sense power of the ear, up to that of the body; plus the four from the door of sense of sound up to that of tangible objects; plus the four of the consciousness of the ear, and so on.


[2129]
SNGAR MIG GI GSUM LA BSHAD PA BZHIN DU, RMI LAM NA DE DAG MED KYANG DE DAG GI RNAM PAR SNANG BAS BRDZUN PA DANG, YID KYI GSUM NI RMI LAM NA YOD KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS MED BZHIN DU DER SNANG BAS BRDZUN PA’O,,

And then the point is that we consider them just as we explained the three connected to the eye: that is—even though, in a dream, none of these exists—they do appear there, and thus are deceptive.  And even though the three relating to the thought may be present in a dream, they do not exist through any nature of their own.  But since they do appear to exist in this way, we consider them deceptive.


[2130]
DE’I PHYIR RMI LAM NA DBANG SHES YOD PA SLOB DPON ‘DI’I LUGS SU BYAS NAS DE LA DGAG PA BYED PA NI, BLO GROS KYI ‘JUG PA SHIN TU RTZING BAS, PHYOGS SNGA’I NAM MA LANGS PA LA DGAG PA’I NYI MA SHAR BA YIN ZHES GRAGS PA BZHIN YIN PAS, RGYANG RING DU DOR BAR BYA STE

As such, there have been people who took the idea that awareness of the senses exists in a dream as being the position of this master; and then undertook to deny it.  This reflects a very coarse engagement of the intellect—something which resembles that saying about how “The sun of blocking another position rose in the sky, without the daybreak of the original position ever having broken.”  As such, we should discard it, to a great distance!


[2131]
BOD KYI MKHAS PAR RLOM PA ‘GA’ ZHIG LA, ‘DI ‘DRA BA’I GRUB MTHA’ LA MKHAS PA’I DBANG PO SEMS DPA’ CHEN PO YIN, NGO SHES PA RNAMS KYI LUGS RAGS PA’ANG MA GO BAR, DE RNAMS BSOD NAMS MA YIN PA RGYUN LDAN DU GSOG PA’I ZHING DU GZUNG NAS, SEMS CAN DU MA ZHIG BSOD NAMS MA YIN PA LA SBYOR BAR SNANG BAS BAG YOD PAR BYOS SHIG

And I address this comment to a number of Tibetans who imagine themselves to be great masters: Those who are lords among masters within schools of thought like this are themselves great bodhisattvas; and you have failed to achieve an understanding of even the roughest outline of their system, for those who really recognize who they are.  It would appear though that you are taking these lords to be like a garden for harvesting steady flows of negative karma, and are guiding many innocent others to wrongful deeds.  And so I ask you, please: Be careful!


[2132]
,’DIR SEMS TZAM PAS GAL TE GNYID NANG ZHES SOGS KYIS BSHAD PA BZHIN DU RANG LUGS BZHAG PA LA, SLOB DPON LEGS LDAN GYIS KYANG DPE MA GRUB PA’I LAN MDZAD PA NA, CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED DU GTOGS PA’I GZUGS YID KYI SHES PAS GZUNG BAR BYA BA CIG ,RMI LAM [f. 158b] NA YOD PAS RNAM PAR SHES PA NI YUL MED PAR ‘GAR YANG YOD PA MA YIN NO ZHES SMRA’O,,

When those of the Mind Only put forth their own system as expressed in the lines that include “If, in our sleep,” Master Bhavaviveka also responds to it saying that the metaphor doesn’t work out; that there is something grasped by the awareness of the thought which is subsumed by the door of sense of all things, and this is present in the dream.  As such, as it says, “It is not at all the case that the consciousness here is one for which there is no object.”


[2133]
‘DI LA DE YANG RIGS PA MA YIN TE, RMI LAM NA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU GSUM PO MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO, ,CI STE GZHAN GYI GZHUNG LUGS BSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DE LTAR KHAS LEN NA NI, DE’I TSE RMI LAM GYI DPE DON MED PA NYID DU ‘GYUR TE, DE BRDZUN PA MA YIN PA’I DON CAN YIN PA NYID KYIS DPE LAS BYUNG BA DNGOS KYI DON BRDZUN PA’I DON {Teng: CAN} NYID DU BSTAN PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO,

To this one might say that this idea too is incorrect:

It’s all because, in a dream, all three are impossible, in every respect.  And in the case that you accept it as being that way because you seek to clarify what the position of the major works of other schools is, then the whole referent of the dream would be obviated.  That is, the very fact that you were interpreting the metaphor as referring to something that is not in fact false means that it would hardly be possible then to take the main point of the metaphor as referring to something which was deceptive.


[2134]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NI YUL DBANG RNAM SHES GSUM RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NI RMI LAM NA YANG RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MI SRID PA’I PHYIR, CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED KYI GZUGS SHES PA LAS DON GZHAN RMI LAM NA YOD PA MI RIGS ZHES BSHAD RGYU YIN LA,

What this is saying is that—if the three of the object, the power, and the consciousness existed through some nature of their own—then even in a dream they would be, in every respect, an impossibility.  And that means that we would have to say that it is wrong to posit form of the door of sense of all things which could exist in a dream as something discrete from awareness itself.


[2135]
DE’I TSE GZUGS DE RANG GIS KYANG BZHED DGOS LA, DE RMI LAM NA YANG YOD PA MI ‘GAL BAS, GZUGS DE LEGS LDAN GYIS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ZHAL GYIS BZHES BAR GSAL BAS DE MED PA’I RGYU MTSAN DU BYA’O,,

In such a case, one would also have to accept this particular form.  And since there would be no contradiction for it to exist, even in a dream, then it is clear that Bhavaviveka would have to agree that it existed through some nature of its own.  And then we could use that as a reason for saying that it didn’t exist.


[2136]
CI STE SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS PHYI’I SKYE MCHED DU GTOGS PA’I GZUGS DON GZHAN MED PA LA, RMI LAM DPER ‘JOG PA DES SEL NUS PAS, DE BSAL BA’I PHYIR GZUGS DE RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PAR KHAS LEN NA NI, DE’I TSE DBU MA PAS BDEN MED SGRUB PA LA RMI LAM GYI DPE BKOD PA DON MED DO,,

And it being the case that in the Mind Only system there could exist no other aspect of form which was taken in by the outer doors of sense, the form that we posit in the metaphor of the dream would be able to remove this problem.  If to clarify this point we accept the idea that the form would exist by definition, then it would serve no purpose for those of the Middle Way school to offer the metaphor of a dream in establishing that nothing exists in reality.


[2137]
RMI LAM DE BRDZUN PA MA YIN PA’I DON CAN TE, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA NYID KYIS DPE LAS BYUNG BA STE, DES MTSON PA’I DNGOS KYI DON BRDZUN PA NYID DU GRUB PA MI SRID PA’I PHYIR TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MA BKAG [f. 159a] BAR DU, BDEN MED SGRUB PA’I RTAGS CHOS DPE DE LA RJES SU ‘GRO BA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

A dream then would carry the connotation of something that was not false.  If because of the very fact that it existed by definition, a point were derived from the metaphor, then it would be impossible for the direct referent represented by the metaphor to be established as something that was, in fact, deceptive.  And that’s because—until such point as we have succeeded in denying that something could exist through some nature of its own—there would be no way that the reason and the quality to be proven in a syllogism to prove that things were not real would ever match the metaphor.


[2138]
DES NA SNGAR RANG GI LUGS KYIS RMI LAM NA GANG SNANG THAMS CAD RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA’I LAN BTAB PA CHES LEGS SO,,

As such, it is excellent in the extreme for those who belong to our own system to offer the reply that not a single object which appears in a dream could ever exist through some nature of its own.


[2139]
‘O NA RANG LUGS KYIS RMI LAM GYI GZUGS GSAL BAR SNANG BA RNAMS CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED PA’I GZUGS SU ‘DOD DAM MI ‘DOD CE NA,

Suppose someone comes with the following question: “Well then, do you agree that forms which appear clearly in a dream belong to the door of sense of all things, or not?”


[2140]
RMI LAM NA DBANG SHES MED PAS YUL LNGAR SNANG BA RNAMS NI YID SHES KHO NA LA SNANG BAS NA, DE LA GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED SOGS LNGA BZHAG TU MED KYANG, YID TZAM GYI NGOR KENG RUS GSAL BAR SNANG BA LTA BU CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED DU ‘JOG PA DANG ‘DRA BAS, CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED KYI GZUGS YIN LA, DE YANG DE’I GZUGS LNGA LAS KUN BRTAGS PA’I GZUGS YIN NO,,

No awareness of a sense power can appear in a dream; as such, things that appear then as though they were one of the five sense objects can appear only to the consciousness of the thoughts.  Thus then it’s similar to the case where—even though it’s true that it cannot be said to constitute the five of the door of sense of visible form or the rest—something like the vivid appearance of a skeleton to nothing more than the thought can be established as constituting the door of sense of all things.  And that can be referred to as “nominal” form, following the model of the five types of form it would have.


[2141]
‘DIS NI ‘DI ‘DRA BA MANG PO ZHIG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

You can use this description to explain many other similar cases.



Using dreams for the deceptive

[2142]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third point from above: establishing—through the metaphor of a dream—that all entities are deceptive.


	[2143]
	[VI.52b]
,RMI LAM JI LTA DE BZHIN SAD ‘DIR YANG,
,DNGOS RNAMS BRDZUN YIN SEMS DE YOD MA YIN,
,SPYOD YUL MED CING DBANG PO RNAMS KYANG MED,

	Just as in a dream,
	Here in waking too
	Entities are deceptive.

	As such, this mind
	Is nothing that exists.

	None of the objects
	Of activity
	Have any existence;

	And neither do
	The powers exist.


[2144]
GANG GI PHYIR RMI LAM NA YUL DBANG RNAM SHES SU SNANG BA GSUM CHAR YANG MI BDEN PA DE’I PHYIR, RMI LAM BDEN MED DU RAB TU GRUB PA’I SGO NAS CHOS GZHAN BDEN MED DU MA GRUB PA RNAMS BSGRUB PA’I PHYIR, SAD PA’I TSE NA YANG CHOS THAMS CAD RANG BZHIN MED PA NYID DU BSGRUBS PAR ‘GYUR RO ZHES BSHAD PA,

In a dream, none of the three that make their appearance are real: neither the object, nor the sense power, nor the awareness.  And for this very reason, we can establish that things which we have yet to establish as being unreal—by demonstrating, perfectly, that a dream has no reality.  And then for this reason we can say that—when we are awake as well—every entity that exists can be established as having absolutely no nature of its own.  To express all this then, we have the following.


[2145]
JI LTAR RMI LAM GYI YUL DANG DBANG PO DANG RNAM PAR SHES PA RNAMS BRDZUN PA DE BZHIN DU, SAD PA’I SKABS ‘DIR YANG DNGOS PO RNAMS BRDZUN PA YIN PAS, SEMS DE RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MA YIN LA, DE BZHIN DU DBANG PO’I SPYOD YUL GZUGS LA SOGS PA RNAMS MED CING, [f. 159b] DBANG PO RNAMS KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED DO,,

It’s just as how the object, and the sense power, and the consciousness in a dream are deceptive; just so, here in the time of waking too entities are deceptive.  As such, this mind is nothing that exists through any nature of its own.  And in the very same way, none of the objects of the activity of the powers—form and the rest—have any existence at all; and neither do the powers exist as things that arise through some nature of their own.


[2146]
DE’I PHYIR MDO LAS,
,JI LTAR SGYU MA’I SEMS CAN DMIGS PA LTAR,
,SNANG YANG DE NYID DU NA YANG DAG MIN,
,SGYU MA LTA BU RMI LAM DANG ‘DRA BA,
,DE LTA’I CHOS NI BDE BAR GSHEGS PAS BSTAN,
ZHES DANG,

Thus it is that sutra says,

An illusory creature
Appears to exist
In just the way we see it;
But it is nothing true.

It is like an illusion;
It is like a dream—

And this is how things
Are described by the
One Who Has Gone to Bliss.


	[2147]
,SRID PA’I ‘GRO BA RMI LAM LTA BU STE,
,’DI LA MI SKYE SU YANG ‘CHI BA MED,
,SEMS CAN MI DANG SROG KYANG MI RNYED DE,
,CHOS ‘DI RNAMS NI DBU BA CHU SHING ‘DRA,
ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA YANG LEGS PAR BSHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO ZHES GSUNGS LA,

The following and the rest is, as it says, “also a great explanation”:

	The way that people
	Travel through existence
	Is just like a dream:

	No one is ever born here,
	And no on ever dies.

Beings find no being human,
Nor any life at all;

All of these things
Are like a bubble,
And hollow as bamboo.


[2148]
SU YANG MI SKYE SOGS NI, DE NYID DU NA YANG DAG MIN, ZHES DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR MDZAD PA LTAR SBYAR RO,,

When the line refers to “no one ever being born here” and such, you should apply a qualification to what is denied: “But it is nothing true.”


[2149]
MDO DE DAG GIS RMI LAM GYI DPES CHOS THAMS CAD DE KHO NAR MA GRUB PAR BSHAD PA DE DBU MA LA ‘GRIG GI ,SEMS TZAM LA MI ‘GRIGS PAS LEGS PAR BSHAD PAR ‘GYUR ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

When these sutras use the metaphor of a dream to describe how nothing in the universe exists in & of itself, it is fine with those of the Middle Way school—but it would not be fine with the Mind Only school.  As such, it is “a fine explanation.”


	[2150]
[VI.53]
Yāvan na bodhaṃ labhate’sti tāvat
trayaṃ hi tasyeha yathāprabodhe,
Sati prabodhe trayam apy asatyaṃ
sa moha nidrākṣaya tas tathaiva.

,’DI NA JI LTAR SAD BZHIN JI SRID DU,
,MI SAD DE SRID DE LA GSUM PO YOD,
,SAD PAR GYUR NA GSUM CHAR YOD MIN LTAR,
,GTI MUG GNYID ZAD LAS DE DE BZHIN NO,

		It’s just as here,
		When we’re awake.

		And it’s the same
		For those who have
		Not yet woken;

		For that length of time,
		All three exist to them.

		When they have awakened,
		None of the three
		Exist any more.

		Just so, we can
		Finish the sleep
		Of dark ignorance;
		Such is it.


[2151]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI NA JI LTAR MI SHES PA’I GNYID YOD KYANG, DE LAS THA DAD PA’I THA MAL BA’I GNYID DANG BRAL BAS SAD PA ‘GA’ ZHIG LA, RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS MA SKYES KYANG MA RIG PA’I GNYID KYIS RMI LAM RMI BZHIN PAS DMIGS PA’I NGOR, GSUM CHAR YANG YOD PA 

As such, it’s just as there is a sleep of unknowing here in the everyday world.  But there is a normal sleep which is separate from this, and then some number of people are free from this sleep, and thus awake.  And then they dream dreams, which are not things that arise all by themselves, but rather due to the sleep of misunderstanding.  And to the perceptions of these dreams, all three do exist.


[2152]
DE BZHIN DU JI SRID DU GNYID DANG MA BRAL BA MA SAD PA RNAMS LA YANG, DE SRID DU DE LA STE DE’I NGOR YUL DBANG RNAM SHES GSUM PO YANG YOD PA YIN NO,, 

It’s the same for those who have not yet woken; who are still not free of the sleep.  For that length of time, to them (that is, to their perceptions), all three again exist: object, power, and consciousness.


[2153]
GNYID SAD PAR GYUR PA NA, RMI LAM GYI GSUM CHAR YOD PA MIN PA LTAR, GTI MUG GI GNYID ZAD PA STE MA LUS PAR DRUNGS PHYUNG BA LAS, CHOS KYI DBYINGS MNGON SUM DU MDZAD PA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS LA NI, GSUM CHAR YANG YOD PA [f. 160a] MA YIN PAS PHYI ROL MED PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA MED DO,,

When they have awakened from the sleep, none of the three of the dream exist any more.  Just so, we can finish the sleep of dark ignorance; which is to say, we can tear out every trace of it.  And then we can become one of those Enlightened Beings who make the Realm of Is their everyday state.  All three are then, again, nothing that exists; and as such, there exists no consciousness where there is a total lack of outer objects.


[2154]
DE YANG JI LTAR GZIGS PA’I NGOR NI GSUM PO MI SNANG LA, JI SNYED PA GZIGS PA’I NGOR NI YUL CAN RANG NYID MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS KYIS BSLAD PA’I DBANG GIS SNANG BA MED KYANG, GANG ZAG GZHAN GYI SHES PA BSLAD PA’I DBANG GIS SNANG BA RNAMS, DE LA SNANG BA’I SGO NAS SANGS RGYAS LA SNANG NAS MKHYEN PA YIN NO,,

None of the three, moreover, can appear to the perceptions of a person who is seeing the way that all things are.  What appears though to the perceptions of a person who is seeing all the things there are?  They is no appearance of them to a subject state of mind due to any infection of it by deep seeds for misunderstanding.  They can though make their appearance by force of the fact that the awareness of another person’s mind is infected; and what is appearing to them then appears to the Buddha, and thus they know them.



No strand of hair

[2155]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second step from above: denying the metaphor of seeing a strand of hair.


	[2156]
[VI.54]
Keśākṛtiṃ yāṃ timiraprabhāvād
dhiyā yayā vetti sa taimirākṣaḥ,
Dvayaṃ hi tadbodham apekṣya satyaṃ
spaṣṭārtha dṛṣṭer dvayam apyalīkam.

,DBANG PO RAB RIB BCAS PA BLO GANG GIS,
,RAB RIB MTHU LAS SKRA RNAMS GANG MTHONG BA,
,DE BLO LA LTOS GNYIS CHAR BDEN PA STE,
,DON GSAL MTHONG LA GNYIS KA’ANG BRDZUN PA YIN,

	A power which has 
Cataracts, a particular
State of mind,

Sees certain strands
		Due to the influence
		Of the cataracts.

		Relative to this mind,
		Both of them are real.

		To one seeing objects clearly,
		Both are false.


[2157]
‘O NA RAB RIB CAN GYIS YOD PA MA YIN PA’I SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA DMIGS PA’I PHYIR, PHYI ROL MED KYANG RNAM PAR SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA YIN NO ZHE NA

One might come with the following:

It is indeed the case that—even though there are no outer objects—awareness does exist through a nature of its own; this is due to the fact that a person who has cataracts on their eyes does perceive strands of hair and the like which do not actually exist.


[2158]
DE YANG MI ‘THAD DO, ,CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, MIG GI DBANG PO RAB RIB DANG BCAS PA LA BLO GANG GIS RAB RIB KYI MTHU LAS SKRA SHAD RNAMS GANG MTHONG BA NA,

This too though is a mistaken idea.  And why is that?  Let’s think of a sense power of the eye which has cataracts; that is, when a particular state of mind sees certain strands of hair due to the influence of cataracts.


[2159]
GANG ZAG DE’I BLO YI MTHONG BA LA LTOS NA NI, MIG SHES DANG SKRA BSHAD {%SHAD} KYI RNAM PA STE SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA’I YUL GNYIS CHAR YANG YOD PA YIN LA, DON GSAL MTHONG BA STE RAB RIB MED PA’I MIG GIS MTHONG BA LA LTOS NA NI SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA DANG, DE SNANG BA’I SHES PA GNYIS KA’ANG BRDZUN PA STE MA SKYES PA YIN TE, SNANG BA TZAM GYI YUL YANG MED PAR SHES PA YOD PA NGES PAR DKA’ BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Relative to what the mind of this person sees, the visual consciousness and the aspect of the strand of hair—the object which appears as though it were a strand of hair—do both indeed exist.  Relative though to the sight of someone who is seeing objects clearly—that is, to the sight of an eye which has no cataracts—both the appearance of something as a strand of hair and the state of mind which holds this appearance are false; which is to say, neither one has actually grown.  That is, it would be difficult to say that one ascertained the existence of a state of mind if there were not even any object which was just appearing to be there.


[2160]
‘DI NI GDON MI ZA BAR DE LTAR NGES PAR ‘DOD DGOS SO,,

And one would have to agree that—beyond any shadow of a doubt—this could be ascertained as such.


	[2161]
[VI.55]
Jñeyaṃ vinā syād yadi nāma buddhis
tat keśa deśānuga locanasya,
Vitaimirasyāpi ca keśa buddhiḥ
syād eva na tvevam ato’sti naitat.

,GAL TE SHES BYA MED PAR BLO YOD NA,
,SKRA DE’I YUL DANG MIG NI RJES ‘BREL PA’I,
,RAB RIB MED LA’ANG SKRA SHAD BLOR ‘GYUR NA,
,DE LTA MA YIN DE PHYIR DE YOD MIN,

		Suppose a state of mind
		Were there in the absence
		Of an existing object;

		The object of that strand
		Would have an eye which
		Was connected with it;

		And one who had
		No cataracts would also
		Have a state of mind
		With a strand of hair—

		And for this reason
		It is not the case;
		It is not something
		Which could exist.


[2162]
DE LTA MA YIN TE GAL TE RAB RIB CAN LA SHES BYA SKRA SHAD MED PAR SKRA SHAD KYI RNAM PA CAN GYI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I BLO SKYE BA YOD NA

And suppose it were not this way; suppose a state of mind were there—that it started—with the person who had the cataracts, which existed through some nature of its own and held the appearance of a strand of hair even in the absence of any strand of hair which was an existing object.


[2163]
GANG DU RAB RIB CAN GYIS SKRA SHAD DE MTHONG BA’I YUL DER [f. 160b] MIG NI RJES SU ‘BREL BA STE GTAD PA’I RAB RIB MED PA LA’ANG RAB RIB CAN DANG ‘DRA BAR SKRA SHAD MTHONG BA’I BLO SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE, YUL MED PAR MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The object which was such that the person with the cataracts saw it as a strand of hair would have to have an eye which was connected with it; that is, which was attending to it.  And in that case, even a person who had no cataracts would also give rise to a state of mind where they saw a strand of hair, in the same way that the the person with the cataracts did.  And this is because the object is equally a non-entity, in both cases.


[2164]
‘DI NI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN LAS SKYE NA, GZHAN YIN TSAD THAMS CAD LAS SKYE BAR ‘PHEN PA BZHIN DU RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SHES PA CIG SKYE NA, YUL SKRA SHAD MED PAR MTSUNGS PA LA, RAB RIB CAN LA DE MTHONG BA SKYE LA, RAB RIB MED PA LA DE MTHONG BA MI SKYE BA MI ‘THAD DE, SHES PA DE RAB RIB LA MI LTOS PAR ‘PHUL NUS PAS ‘BREL MED DU ‘GRO BA’I PHYIR RO,,

If something could grow from something other than it which existed through some nature of its own, then that implies that it could grow as well from each & every other object in the universe which was other than it.   Just so, if it were possible for one state of mind to grow which existed through some nature of its own, then it would be incorrect to say that—in a case where the strand of hair were equally absent—the sight of it would grow in a person who had cataracts but the sight of it would not grow in a person who had no cataracts.  That is, since there would be the potential for this state of mind to make itself known without any dependence upon cataracts, everything would happen without any connection to anything.


[2165]
RAB RIB MED PA LA SGRA SHAD DU SNANG BA’I BLO SKYE BA DE LTA MA YIN PA DE’I PHYIR PHYI ROL MED PAR RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SHES PA DE YOD PA MIN NO,,

And so it is not the case that a state of mind which holds the appearance of a strand of hair could start with the person who had no cataracts; and for this reason, that state of mind which exists through some nature of its own—in the absence of outer objects—is not something which could ever exist.



Denying others on deep seeds

[2166]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, BAG CHAGS SMIN MA SMIN NYID LAS DON SNANG GI RNAM SHES SKYE BA DANG MI SKYE BA DGAG PA, SLAR YANG PHYI ROL MED PAR RNAM SHES YOD TSUL BRJOD PA DGAG PA, SEMS TZAM GYI LUGS BKAG PA LA LUNG GI GNOD PA MED PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

This brings us to our second section from above: denying the referent of the metaphor in a case where awareness arises from the power of a deep seed.  Here we proceed in three steps: denying that an awareness that takes on the image of the object and which comes from either the ripening or the lack of ripening of a deep seed could ever grow, or not grow; once more denying the description of how there could be an awareness, in the absence of outer objects; and showing how there is no problem from scripture when we deny the system of the Mind Only.


[2167]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, GZHAN LUGS BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these has two parts of its own: a presentation of the position of the opponent; and a denial of this position.  Here is the first.


[2168]
GAL TE SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA’I SKRA SHAD LTA BU’I YUL GYI YOD PA NYID RNAM SHES SKYE BA’I RGYU YIN NA, RAB RIB MED PA LA YANG SKRA SHAD SNANG BAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG NA DE NI MIN NO,,

Suppose one were to say that—if the very existence of an object similar to a strand of hair that appeared as a strand of hair were the cause of an awareness growing—then the strand of hair would appear as well even to a person with no cataracts.  Our answer then would be “That’s not the case.”


	[2169]
[VI.56]
Dhī śakti pāko’sti na śuddha dṛṣṭer
yatas tato dhīr na hi jāyate’sya,
Na jñeya sadbhāva viyoga taś cet
tac chaktyabhāvān na hi siddham etat.

[VI.56a]
,GANG PHYIR MTHONG BA DAG LA BLO NUS NI,
,SMIN MED DE PHYIR DE LA BLO MI ‘GYUR,
,SHES BYA YOD DNGOS BRAL BAS MIN ZHE NA,

		Suppose this were
Your position:

“It is not the case
		That there would be
		Any ripening
		
		Of the potential
		For a state of mind
		With those who saw.

		For this reason then,
		It is not the case
		That a state of mind could
		Ever come with these

		Because it was devoid
		Of any entity
		Which possessed
		An existing object.”


[2170]
‘O NA CI ZHE NA,

“So then,” one might ask, “how does it work?”  Well, suppose you took the following position—


[2171]
RNAM SHES SKYE BA’I BAG CHAGS SNGAR BZHAG PA DE SMIN PA DANG MA SMIN PA DE DAG RNAM PAR SHES PA SKYE BA DANG MI SKYE BA’I RGYU YIN TE,

A deep seed for the growth of awareness was planted earlier on; and the ripening—or the not ripening—of that seed is the cause for the growth, or the failure to grow, of that awareness.


[2172]
DE’I PHYIR GANG ZAG GANG LA SKRA’I RNAM PA CAN GYI SHES PA SNGA MA GZHAN GYIS BZHAG PA’I [f. 161a] BAG CHAGS SMIN PA YOD PA DE KHO NA LA, SKRA SHAD KYI RNAM PA CAN GYI SHES PA ‘BYUNG GI

As such, it is only a person who is experiencing the ripening of a deep seed that was planted by another, previous state of mind that possessed an image of a hair that will have an awareness arise with the image of a strand of hair.


[2173]
,GANG GI PHYIR RAB RIB MED PAR YUL MTHONG BA DAG LA SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA’I BLO YI NUS PA BAG CHAGS NI SMIN PA MED PA DE’I PHYIR RAB RIB MED PA DE LA SKRA SHAD MTHONG BA’I BLO SKYE BAR MI ‘GYUR BA YIN GYI, SHES BYA SKRA SHAD DU YOD PA’I DNGOS PO DANG BRAL BAS BLO DE MI SKYE BA MIN NO ZHE NA,

It is not however the case that there would be any ripening of a deep seed—the potential for a state of mind that took on the aspect of a strand of hair—with those who saw the object but had no cataracts.  And for this reason then, it is not the case that a state of mind where they saw a strand of hair could ever come to grow with these individuals who had no cataracts.  It is not though the case that this state of mind would fail to grow because it was devoid of any entity which possessed an existing object which was a strand of hair.  

Suppose then that this were your position.



The present has no potential on its own

[2174]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, DA LTAR BA LA NUS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DGAG ,MA ‘ONGS PA’I NUS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DGAG, ‘DAS PA LA NUS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our second part from above: a denial of our opponent’s position.  We’ll cover this point in three steps: a denial that the present could possess a potential that existed through some nature of its own; a denial that the potential of the future could exist through some nature of its own; and a denial that the potential of the past could exist through some nature of its own.  Here is the first.


	[2175]
	[VI.56b]
,NUS DE MED [207a] PAS ‘DI NI ‘GRUB MA YIN,

	Since there is no such thing
	As a potential like this
	Which exists [f. 207a],

	That is not something
	Which could be established.


[2176]
GAL TE NUS PA ZHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA CIG YOD NA NI, DE’I TSE NUS PA DE SMIN MA SMIN LAS RNAM SHES ‘BYUNG MI ‘BYUNG YOD DU CHUG NA YANG, NUS PA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA DE MED PAS, ‘DI NI ‘GRUB PA MA YIN NO,,

If what we call “potential” here were one that could exist through some nature of its own, then admittedly we could say that awareness would occur, or not occur, when that potential had ripened, or not yet ripened.  But since there is no such thing as a potential like this which exists in & of itself, then that is not something which could be established.


	[2177]
[VI.57]
Jātasya śakter na hi sambhavo’sti
nājāta rūpasya ca śaktir asti,
Viśeṣaṇaṃ nāsti vinā viśeṣyaṃ
vandhyā sutasyāpi ca tat prasaṅgaḥ.

	[VI.57a]
,SKYES LA NUS PA SRID PA YOD MA YIN,
,MA SKYES NGO BO LA YANG NUS YOD MIN,

	It is not a possibility
	That there could exist
	A potential to what
	Had already grown;

	Neither could there exist
	Any potential that had
	A nature of
Not having yet grown.


[2178]
JI LTAR MI ‘GRUB CE NA,

“And just how is it,” one may ask, “that this could not be established?”


[2179]
NUS PA ‘DI RTOG PA NA RNAM SHES DA LTAR BA’I ‘BREL PA CAN ZHIG GAM, RNAM SHES ‘DAS PA DANG MA ‘ONGS PA’I ‘BREL BA CAN ZHIG TU ‘GYUR GRANG,

When you imagine this kind of potential, do you think of it as something which has a connection to a present state of consciousness, or something which has a connection to a consciousness which is past or future?


[2180]
DE LA RE ZHIG SKYES PA STE DA LTAR BA LA NUS PA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA SRID PA NYID YOD PA MA YIN LA, MA SKYES PA MA ‘ONGS PA’I NGO BO LA YANG NUS PA YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

On this question, to start with, we would say that it is not at all a possibility that there could exist a potential to the present—to what had already grown—which also existed in & of itself.  Neither could there exist any potential that had a nature of being future; that is, of not having yet grown.


[2181]
DE LA RE SHIG {%ZHIG} RNAM SHES DA LTAR BA LA NUS PA ‘DOD PA NA,

And let’s say, for a moment, that you assert that the present form of this awareness had some potential.


[2182]
RNAM SHES DANG NUS PA GNYIS KA DUS MTSUNGS SU ‘GYUR LA, DE’I TSE NUS PA DANG NUS PA CAN GNYIS LA NUS PA’I RNAM SHES ZHES RNAM DBYE DRUG PA YIN PA DE’I TSE, DE GNYIS DON GZHAN DU MI RIGS PAS [f. 161b] NUS PA’I RNAM SHES NI NUS PA NYID DU YOD PA MI RIGS TE,

In this case, both the awareness and that potential would have to be the same, as far as the time in which they existed.  In that case, then the sixth grammar case—“the consciousness of the potential”—would apply to both the potential itself, and to what possessed the potential.  And in that case, it would be illogical to say that the two were two different things.  As such, it would be incorrect to say that the consciousness of the potential existed as the potential itself.


[2183]
YOD NA NI ‘BRAS BU LA RANG LAS GZHAN PA’I RGYU MED PA CAN DU ‘GYUR ZHING, MYU GU SKYES PA NA YANG SA BON MI ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If it did exist in that way, then the result would be something that lacked a cause which was other than it; and once the sprout had grown, then the seed could never stop.


[2184]
GANG GI TSE NUS PA DANG NUS PA CAN GNYIS LA NUS PA LAS RNAM SHES ZHES RNAM DBYE LNGA PA YIN PA DE’I TSE NI, RNAM PAR SHES PA SKYES PA DUS MNYAM PA’I NUS PA LAS ‘BYUNG BAR MI RIGS TE, RGYU’I DUS NA ‘BRAS BU YANG YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And then suppose that the relationship between the two of the potential and that which possessed the potential were expressed by the fifth grammar case: “the consciousness which came from the potential.”  In this case, it would be incorrect to say that the consciousness’ having taken birth arose from a potential which were simultaneous with it.  This is because the result would also be present during the time of its cause.


[2185]
DE LTAR NA RE ZHIG RNAM SHES DA LTAR BA LA DE’I RGYU’I NUS PA YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

As such, we would have to say for the moment that the potential of its cause could not be present with the present form of the consciousness.



Denying a self-existent
potential for the future

[2186]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which bring us to our second step from above: a denial that the potential of the future could exist through some nature of its own


[2187]
RNAM SHES MA SKYES PA LA NUS PA YOD NA NI, RNAM PAR SHES PA’I NUS PA ZHES SBYAR BA NA, NUS PA KHYAD PAR GYI GZHI DANG RNAM SHES KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS YIN NO,,

Suppose that the consciousness yet to arise had some potential.  When you phrase it like this—“The consciousness potential”—then the potential becomes the basis of the particular feature and the consciousness becomes the feature that this basis possesses.


[2188]
DE LA RNAM SHES MA SKYES PA MA ‘ONGS PA NI, RNAM PAR SHES PA’O ZHES SGRUB PA’I NGO BOR BSTAN PAR MI NUS LA, RNAM PAR SHES PA MA YIN ZHES RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I DGAG PA’I NGO BOR BSTAN PAR MI NUS SO,,

Suppose here though that the consciousness had not yet grown; that it was future.  In this case you could not speak of it as having an established existence: “The consciousness.”  But neither could you speak of it as “not being consciousness”: as having a nature where you denied that it could exist through some nature of its own.
 

[2189]
GANG GI TSE RNAM SHES MA ‘ONGS PA DA LTAR RNAM SHES SU MED PA DE’I TSE, NUS PA ‘DI NI RNAM SHES ‘DI’I NUS PA’O ZHES BYA BAR GANG GIS NUS PA KHYAD PAR DU BYED PAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR RO,,

And suppose there is a point in time when a future consciousness does not yet exist as a present consciousness.  At that point, how could you distinguish then a potential where you said “This particular potential is the potential of this particular consciousness”?  In fact, you could not.


	[2190]
	[VI.57b]
,KHYAD PAR MED PAR KHYAD PAR CAN YOD MIN,
,MO GSHAM BU LA’ANG DE NI YOD PAR THAL,

	There would exist none
	Characterized by
	A certain feature,

	In the absence of
	A feature.

	This would also
	Have to exist
	With the child
	Of a barren woman.


[2191]
DE LTAR NA KHYAD PAR RNAM SHES MED PAR DES KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA CAN GYI NUS PA YOD PA MA YIN TE, DE LTA MA YIN NA MO GSHAM GYI BU LA’ANG DE’I NUS PA NI YOD PAR THAL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As such, there would exist no potential which could be characterized by a certain feature, in the absence of any consciousness that was its feature.  And if this were not the case, then it would also have to be the case that this kind of potential also existed with the child of a barren woman.


[2192]
GAL TE RNAM SHES GANG ZHIG NUS PA LAS SKYE ‘GYUR DE SNYING LA BSAMS NAS, RNAM SHES ‘DI YI NUS PA ‘DI YIN ZHING NUS PA ‘DI LAS RNAM SHES ‘DI ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR [f. 162a] RO, ,ZHES DE LTAR KHYAD PAR DANG KHYAD GZHI’I DNGOS POR ‘GYUR TE,

Suppose that deep in your heart you are thinking of a certain consciousness which is going to grow from the potential, and then you speak of “such-and-such a potential of such-and-such a consciousness,” and “such-and-such a consciousness that will arise from such-and-such a potential.”  That is, suppose there comes to be an entity where there is a feature and some locus for the basis.


	[2193]
[VI.58]
Bhaviṣyatā ced vyapadeśa iṣṭaḥ
śaktiṃ vinā nāsti hi bhāvitāsya,
Parasparāyāśrayaṇī ca siddhir
asiddhir eveti vadanti santaḥ.

,GAL TE ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR BAS BSNYAD ‘DOD NA,
,NUS PA MED PAR ‘DI YI ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR MED,
,PHAN TSUN DON LA BRTEN PA’I ‘GRUB PA NI,
,GRUB MIN NYID CES DAM PA RNAMS KYIS GSUNGS,

		Suppose you assert
		That you apply a term
		To that which is
		Yet to come.

		But there cannot exist
		Any which could arise
		In the absence
		Of a potential.

These are things
Which occur in a
Codependent relationship;

The holy ones
Would say that
That is something
Which could only never exist.


[2194]
‘JIG RTEN NA ‘BRAS CHAN TSOS SHIG CES PA DANG, SNAL MA ‘DI LA RAS YUG THOGS SHIG CES ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR GYI ‘BRAS CHAN DANG, SNAM BU LA BSAMS NAS DE SKAD SMRAS PA DANG,

Suppose one comes with the following comment:

In the everyday world, we say things like “Could you cook that fluffy rice?” or “Could you weave some cloth from that thread?”  When we speak thus, we are actually thinking of fluffy rice that is going to be there, and cloth that is going to be there.


[2195]
MDZOD LAS KYANG,
,MNGAL DU ‘JUG PA GSUM DAG STE,
,’KHOR LO SGYUR DANG RANG BYUNG GNYIS,

And in the Treasure House of Higher Knowledge too we read—

	There are three ways in which
	They enter into the womb:

	An emperor of the wheel,
	And the two who are self-born.


[2196]
ZHES ‘KHOR SGYUR SOGS SU ‘GYUR RGYU ZHIG MNGAL DU ‘JUG PA LA, DE DAG MNGAL DU ‘JUG PAR BSHAD PA BZHIN ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR BA’I RNAM SHES LA BSAMS NAS RNAM SHES KYI NUS PA ZHES BSNYAD PAR ‘DOD DO ZHE NA,

That is, we are talking about how someone who is to become a wheel emperor enters the womb, referring to them as if it were a wheel emperor entering the womb.  And so what we assert is that we apply a term here in the same sense, referring to “the potential for the consciousness” where we are talking about a consciousness which is yet to come.


[2197]
DE YANG SNYING PO MED DE, RES ‘GA’ ZHIG TU YOD PAR ‘GYUR NA NI, ‘BRAS BU DE DA GZOD ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR GYI, RTAG TU DUS NAM GYI TSE YANG MI ‘BYUNG BAR NGES PA MO GSHAM GYI BU LA SOGS PA DANG, ‘DUS MA BYAS KYI NAM MKHA’ LA SOGS PA NI, DA LTA DANG DUS PHYIS GANG DU YANG MI ‘BYUNG NGO,,

This position though is hollow.  If you are talking about something that at for some time being is existent, then the result would have already made its appearance.  But there are also things like the child of a barren woman that will never make their appearance.  And items such as empty space which is not a produced thing never come into being anyway—whether we are talking about now, or some later time.


[2198]
DE’I PHYIR GAL TE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I NUS PA YOD NA RNAM SHES ‘BYUNG DU CHUG KYANG, GANG GI TSE DA LTA MA ‘ONGS PA’I RNAM SHES RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NI DUS NAM YANG MED PAS, DE SKYED PA’I NUS PA GTAN MED PA DE’I TSE, MO GSHAM GYI BU LA SOGS PA BZHIN DU RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RNAM SHES SKYED PA’I NUS PA MED PAR RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RNAM SHES ‘DI YI ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR BA MED DO,,

And so we can say that—if there did exist a potential that existed through some nature of its own—we could allow that consciousness might then occur.  But in a situation where there is never, upon any occasion, any present or future consciousness which could exist through a nature of its own, there cannot exist at all any potential which could trigger it.  And in this case, there cannot exist any consciousness that existed through its own nature and which could arise in the absence of a potential that triggered a consciousness that existed through some nature of its own: the whole thing would be like the child of a barren woman, or something of that ilk.


[2199]
DBU MA PAS MYU GU SKYE BA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA’I SKABS MANG POR, MYU GU SA BON GYI DUS SU MED KYANG SKYE NA, RI BONG GI RVA LA SOGS PA YANG SKYE BAR [f. 162b] ‘GYUR RO, ,ZHES HA CANG THAL BA ‘PHEN PA’I

In many contexts where those of the Middle Way school deny that the growing of a sprout could happen by definition, they say things like “If the sprout could be absent at the time of the seed and yet still grow, then the horn of a rabbit or the like would also grow.”  That is, they point to an absurd consequence that would be necessitated.


[2200]
GNAD NI RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I MYU GU NI SKABS GCIG TU MED NA DUS NAM YANG MED DGOS PAS, GZHI MA GRUB DANG KHYAD MED DU ‘GRO BA’I RGYU MTSAN GYIS YIN GYI, SPYIR MYU GU SA BON GYI DUS NA MED KYANG SKYE NA, RI BONG GI RVA YANG SKYE BAR THAL ZHES ‘GOG PA GTAN MIN NO,,

The point of such statements is to say that—if there were any single occasion upon which a sprout that existed by definition were absent—then it would have to always be absent.  And then there wouldn’t be any difference from saying that it never existed in the first place.  This is the rationale being employed at this point; it is not the point though to say that—generally speaking—if a sprout were absent in the time of the seed but were still able to grow, then a rabbit horn would also have to grow.  This is not at all the denial being made here.


[2201]
RIGS PA ‘DIS NI ‘BRAS CHAN LA SOGS PA YANG BSHAD PA YIN TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA LTAR NA, ‘BRAS CHEN SOGS ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR YANG GTAN MED DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We can use this same reasoning to explain the fluffy rice and so on.  That is, if their growing were something that happened through some nature of its own, then the fluffy rice or whatever to come would also have to be entirely non-existent.


[2202]
GZHAN YANG RNAM SHES ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR YOD PA LA LTOS NAS DE’I NUS PA ‘JOG LA, NUS PA LAS RNAM SHES ‘BYUNG NGO ZHES NUS PA LA LTOS NAS RNAM SHES ‘JOG NA, PHAN TSUN GYI DON LA BRTEN PA’I ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Moreover, the potential for a consciousness is posited relative to a consciousness which is yet to occur; and we posit the consciousness relative to the potential; we say: “The consciousness is going to rise from the potential.”  As such, these are things which occur in a codependent relationship.


[2203]
DE ‘DOD DO ZHE NA, DE LTAR NA RNAM SHES RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MIN PA NYID CES DAM PA MKHYEN RAB MNGA’ BA RNAMS KYIS GSUNGS SO,,

And if you say that all this seems like something you could agree to, then in that case the holy ones—which is to say, those who possess supreme intellect—would say that, in that case, a consciousness which could exist through some nature of its own is something which could only never exist.


[2204]
‘GREL PAR RING THUNG DANG PHA ROL TSUL {%TSUR} ROL LTA BU’I LTOS ‘GRUB RNAMS NI BTAGS PAR YOD PAR ‘GYUR GYI, GRUB PA RANG BZHIN PA MED PAR GSUNGS PAS DE DAG LA GRUB PA SPYIR ‘GOG PA MIN GYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA’I KHYAD PAR RNAMS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

In the autocommentary, they talk about how things like long & short—and “over there” & “over here”—exist as designated relative to each other; but since it is said that their existence is not one which has any quality of being natural, it is not the case that we are denying, in general, that they could have any existence at all.  As such, you need to understand the details of how we deny that things could exist through any nature of their own.


[2205]
DE LTAR SMRA NA NI KHO BO CAG GI SMRA BA’I RJES SU ‘BRANG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

When you can describe things like this, then you can say that you are a follower of the way that we describe things.


[2206]
DE LTAR NA RNAM SHES MA ‘ONGS PA LA YANG NUS PA MED DO,,

And as such, we can say that future consciousness has no potential either.



Denying a past on its own

[2207]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third and final step from above: a denial that the potential of the past could exist through some nature of its own.

	[2208]
[VI.59]
Niruddha śakteḥ paripākataḥ syād
yadyanya śakteḥ parasambhavaḥ syāt,
Santānināṃ tatra mitho’sti bhedaḥ
sarvasya sarva prabhavas tataḥ syād.

,GAL TE ‘GAGS PA’I NUS SMIN LAS ‘GYUR NA,
,GZHAN GYI NUS PA LAS GZHAN ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR,
,RGYUN CAN RNAMS DER PHAN TSUN THA DAD YOD,
,DE PHYIR THAMS CAD KUN LAS ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR,

	Suppose that
	Some potential
	From the stopping
	Ripens, and from that
	There comes this.

	Something other
	Is arising from
	A potential which
	Is something other.

	In a case where
	Things have the flow
	There exist those
	Distinct from one another;

	In that case
	Everything would happen
	From everything.


[2209]
DA NI ‘DAS PA LA YANG NUS PA MED DO ZHES BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Now the next part of our text then is dedicated to showing how the past has no potential either.


[2210]
GAL TE SKYES NAS ‘GAG BZHIN PA’I RNAM SHES KYIS RANG DANG MTHUN PA’I ‘BRAS BU’I DON DU, KUN GZHI RNAM SHES LA BAG CHAGS KYI NUS PA’I [f. 163a] KHYAD PAR BZHAG PA,

Suppose that a consciousness which has grown—and is now in the act of stopping—deposits some type of potential, in the form of a deep seed, into the foundation consciousness—towards creating a result which corresponds to it.


[2211]
RNAM PAR SHES PA ‘GAGS PA’I NUS PA SMIN PA LAS ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR GYI RNAM SHES ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR NA NI,

And suppose it is the case then that some potential from the stopping of the consciousness ripens, and from that there comes this arisal of the consciousness which was yet to come.


[2212]
RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN GYI NUS PA LAS ‘BRAS BU’I RNAM SHES GZHAN ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And so something other—a resulting consciousness—is arising from a potential which is something other, and which exists through some nature of its own.


[2213]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, GANG GI PHYIR RGYUN CAN SKAD CIG MA RNAMS RIM CAN DU ‘BYUNG BA DER, KHYOD LTAR NA SNGA PHYI PHAN TSUN NGO BO NYID KYIS THA DAD PA YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And why is that?  It is for the reason that—in a case where the moments, the things that have the flow, are occurring, one by one, in a stream—there exist those that come before and those that come later, and which are distinct from one another, by their very nature.


[2214]
DE YANG RGYUN GYI BYINGS LAS TA NU NI RGYAS PA LA’O ZHES PA LA RKYEN BYIN PAS BRGYUD PAS NA RGYUN NO, ZHES PAR ‘GYUR TE,

Here also we can point out that—regarding the Sanskrit root for “stream” here—“tanu refers to a spreading.”  That is, if we enhance the basic source syllable we can say “it’s a stream due to the flowing.”


[2215]
CHU KLUNG GI RGYUN LTAR RGYUN CHAGS PAR RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU ‘BREL BAR ‘JUG PA NA, SKYE ‘CHI BRGYUD PAS BAR STONG MED PAR RNAM PAR MA CHAD PAR GNAS PA, ‘DU BYED KYI SKAD CIG DUS GSUM PA’I NYE BAR LEN PA CAN LA BYA STE, SKAD CIG MA RNAMS GANG GI CHA SHAS YIN PA’I CHA CAN YIN GYI SNGA PHYI BAR MA CHAD PA TZAM MIN NO,,

And so suppose we have causes and their effects going on in a connection, in a continued series which resembles the flow of a stream of fresh water.  As such, a flow of birth and death goes on with a single break inbetween, uninterrupted.  The moments of fresh karma take as their precursor the object across the three times; it is the whole which possesses the moments as its parts; but then again it’s not as if there is no disconnect between the moments, earlier & later.


[2216]
DE NI RGYUN GYI CHA SHAS RDZAS KYI SKAD CIG MA RNAMS LA YOD PAS NA, RGYUN GYI YAN LAG RDZAS KYI SKAD CIG MA RNAMS LA RGYUN CAN ZHES BRJOD DE,

Here the components of the flow are the seconds of the material; and so the parts of the flow are described as the seconds of the material referred to collectively as “what comes in a flow.”


[2217]
RGYUN GYI CHA SHAS DANG YAN LAG RNAMS CHA CAN GYI RGYUN DE’I YIN PAS RGYUN LA DE’I NYE BAR LEN PA ZHES BRJOD DE, DPER NA BUM PA NI BUM PA’I MCHU DANG MGRIN PA LA SOGS PA’I NYE BAR LEN PA YIN PA BZHIN NO,,

The parts of the flow, and its components, belong to the flow which represents the whole.  As such, we speak of the flow as their “precursor.”  For example, it’s like the way in which a vase is the precursor of the spout, the neck, and the other parts of a vase.


[2218]
SKAD CIG SNGA PHYI DE DAG PHAN TSUN GZHAN DANG GZHAN DU THA DAD CING, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID DU PHA ROL POS KHAS BLANGS PA YIN NO,,

The other party here accepts the idea that the earlier and later seconds are discrete, each one from the other; and that they are invariably others from each other which exist by definition.


[2219]
DE LTAR NA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN GYI NUS PA LAS GZHAN ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As such, we can say then that one thing which is other comes from a potential which is also other and which exists by definition.


[2220]
GAL [f. 163b] TE DE NI ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR SKYON MA YIN NO SNYAM NA, DE’I PHYIR DNGOS PO THAMS CAD RANG LAS GZHAN PA’I DNGOS PO KUN LAS ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And now suppose you think to yourself that there would be no problem with accepting the position just described.  Well, in that case everything there is would happen from everything else there is which is different from it.


	[2221]
[VI.60]
Santānino yadyapi tatra bhinnāḥ
santāna bhedo’sti hi naiva teṣām,
Tato na doṣā iti sādhyam etat
abheda santāna gater ayogāt.

,GAL TE DER NI RGYUN CAN THA DAD KYI,
,DE DAG LA RGYUN THA DAD MED DE’I PHYIR,
,NYES MED CE NA ‘DI NI BSGRUB BYA ZHIG
,THA MI DAD RGYUN SKABS MI RIGS PHYIR RO,

	Suppose then
	There is the composite
	Flow of those
	That are different
	From each other.

	But suppose you say
	That the flow for those
	Could never involve
	Separate things;

	And so there is
	No such problem.

	This idea though
	Is something that
	You would still
	Have to prove.

	It is illogical to say
	That there could be
	Any opportunity

	For a flow of things
	That were not separate.	


[2222]
GAL TE YANG SKAD CIG SNGA PHYI RIM GYIS ‘JUG PA DER NI RGYUN CAN RDZAS KYI SKAD CIG MA RNAMS PHAN TSUN NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I THA DAD DE GZHAN NYID YOD MOD KYI,

Suppose then that we do accept the idea that there in the progressive flow of the earlier & later seconds there are seconds of the material, the composite flow, which are different from each other, by their very nature. 


[2223]
DE LTA NA’ANG SKAD CIG SNGA PHYI BA DE DAG LA RGYUN NI THA DAD PA MED PA STE GCIG PA KHO NA YIN PA DE’I PHYIR, THAMS CAD THAMS CAD LAS SKYE BAR THAL BA’I NYES PA MED DO ZHE NA

But suppose you say that “Even in that case too though the flow for those things—the earlier & later seconds—could never involve separate things; rather, it could only be singular.  And so there is no such problem, where everything would have to grow from everything else.”


[2224]
SNGA PHYI RGYUD GCIG YIN PA ‘DI NI GZHAN SKYE LA HA CANG THAL BA SPONG BA’I LAN DNGOS GZHI’O,,

This idea though—of a single flow with earlier & later parts—is the most basic response for denying the idea that things arising from other things is far too much.


[2225]
SNGA PHYI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I SO SO BA LA RGYUD GCIG GRUB NA, SKYON MED DU CHUG KYANG RGYUD GCIG PA ‘DI MA GRUB PAS NA RGYUD GCIG PA ‘DI NI BSGRUB PAR BYA BA ZHIG GO

Let’s say that a single flow is composed of earlier and later parts that are separate and which exist through some essential nature of their own.  Even if you allow that there is no problem here, they could never constitute a single flow.  As such, this idea of a single flow is something that you would still have to prove.


[2226]
,CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, SNGA PHYI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I THA DAD RNAMS LA THA MI DAD PA’I RGYUN TE RGYUD GCIG PA’I GO SKABS MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR TE,

And why is that?  Because it is illogical to say that there could be any opportunity for a single stream, a flow, of things that were not separate with these separate parts of earlier and later that existed in and of themselves.


	[2227]
[VI.61]
Maitropaguptāśrayiṇo hi dharmā
na hyeka santāna gatāḥ paratvāt,
Svalakṣaṇenāpi pṛthak pṛthag ye
te’pyeka santāna gatā na yuktāḥ.

,BYAMS PA NYER SBAS LA BRTEN CHOS RNAMS NI,
,GZHAN NYID PHYIR NA RGYUD GCIG GTOGS MIN TE,
,GANG DAG RANG MTSAN NYID KYIS SO SO BA,
,DE DAG RGYUD GCIG GTOGS PA RIGS MA YIN,

	John is leaning on Joe;
	Still, they are entities
	That are essentially different;
	
As such, they are not
Sharing a single flow.

For those that were
Separate things that
Existed by definition,

It would not be logical
That they were sharing
A single flow.


[2228]
DPER NA BYAMS PA DANG NYER SBAS LA BRTEN PA STE RGYUD DU GTOGS PA NI, GANG ZAG SO SO’I GZHAN NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR NA, RGYUD GCIG TU GTOGS PA MIN PA

Suppose for example that John is leaning on Joe, and in that sense their flows are intertwined.  Still though they are essentially different from one another: they are separate people.  As such, we would not say that they were sharing a single flow.


[2229]
DE BZHIN DU, SNGA PHYI BA GANG DAG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I SO SO BA DE DAG NI, RGYUD GCIG TU GTOGS PA STE GCIG PA NYID RIGS PA DANG LDAN PA MA YIN NO,,

The same would hold true with those earlier and later parts that were separate things that existed by definition.  It would not be something that was logical to say that they were all one and the same: that they were sharing a single flow.


[2230]
DE LTAR NA GZHAN SKYE LA HA CANG THAL BA ‘PHANGS PA’I SKYON SPONG LA, SA LU’I SA MYUG RGYUD GCIG YIN LA NAS KYI SA MYUG DANG RGYUD MI GCIG PAS THAMS CAD LAS THAMS CAD MI SKYE ZHES ZER BAS, SKYON SPONG MI NUS PA’I GNAD PHA ROL POS, RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I [f. 164a] GZHAN KHAS BLANGS PA LA THUG PAR BSTAN PAS,

As such, people have to say the following sort of thing to avoid the problem that is raised by the idea that things grow from things other than themselves—the problem that it would all be too much.  That is, for this they make the claim that “The seed & the sprout for a rice plant constitute a single flow; but they are not a single flow with the seed & the sprout for a barley plant; as such, it is not the case that everything grows from everything else.”  The fact that this does not allow them to avoid the problem comes down to one crucial point: that these other parties accept the idea that one thing could be other than another thing by definition.  And we have shown them this.


[2231]
GZHAN TZAM LA ‘PHEN PA MIN PAR SHIN TU GSAL BA LA LDOG PA GCIG PA’I DPUNG ‘PHUL SOGS BYED PA DANG, RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN CES GSUNGS PA DGAG BYA’I KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA MA GO BAS,

Here those other parties though have misunderstood how totally clear it is that none of these problems comes up when we accept something which is a simple other; they continue to toss out examples where they pile up items as if they were all stuck together into one thing.  It seems as though they are just completely incapable of understanding it when we apply the term for the thing whose existence we deny to something which is other, by saying that it would exist “through some nature of its own.”


[2232]
DPAL LDAN ZLA BA NYID KYIS SKYON SPONG MI NUS PAR GSUNGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN BZHAG NAS MA GSUNGS PA’I RTOG BZO BYED PA NI YANG DAG PA’I GRUB MTHA’ SLOD PA’O,,

They throw out to us, as one of their reasons, the idea that the glorious Chandrakirti himself made statements in which he was unable to avoid certain problems; and in this way they make up ideas that this Master never did express, polluting what is in actuality the very purest school of thought.



The Mind Only on outer objects

[2233]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, GZHAN GYI LUGS BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our second step from before: once more denying the description of how there could be an awareness, in the absence of outer objects.  Here we will first state the position of our opponent; and then deny that position.  Here is that statement.


	[2234]
[VI.62]
Cakṣur dhiyo janma yataḥ svaśakter
ājāyate’nantaram eva tasyāḥ,
Śakteḥ svavijñāna samāśrayasya
rūpīndriyaṃ cakṣur iti pratītiḥ.

,MIG BLO SKYE BA RANG NUS GANG ZHIG LAS,
,DE MA THAG TU KUN NAS SKYE ‘GYUR ZHING,
,RANG GI RNAM SHES RTEN GYI NUS DE LA,
,DBANG PO GZUGS CAN MIG GCES {%CES}
BYA BAR RTOGS,

The growing of
Awareness of the eye
Springs forth from
That potential which
Occurs just after that.

And its consciousness
Is the support for a potential;

They think of this and say,
“This is the eye,
A physical sense power.”


[2235]
DE SKAD BSTAN PA YIN DANG SLAR YANG SEMS TZAM PAS RANG GI LUGS BRJOD PA GTZO BOR BYAS PA NYID KYIS RANG GI ‘DOD DON ‘GRUB PAR BSAMS SHING SMRAS PA,

And so this is the presentation; and then once again the followers of the Mind Only hope to focus on describing, primarily, their own position—thus then they consider ways of establishing it and present the following.


[2236]
MIG GI BLO STE RNAM PAR SHES PA SKYE BA’I RANG GI NUS PA BAG CHAGS GANG ZHIG KUN GZHI LA, RNAM SHES GZHAN GYIS RANG ‘GAG BZHIN PA NA, DE MA THAG TU ‘JOG PAR BYED LA,

Let’s look at how the awareness of the eye—which is to say, that consciousness—has the deep seed for it, that potential for it to grow, planted into the foundation consciousness.  This is done by another instance of consciousness as it is in the act of ending, and occurs just after that.


[2237]
DE SMIN PA LAS DUS PHYIS SNGA MA DE’I RNAM PA’I RJES SU BYED PA’I MIG GI RNAM SHES SKYE BAR ‘GYUR ZHING, RANG GI STE MIG GI RNAM SHES DE NUS PA’I SKAD CIG BAR MED PA GANG ZHIG LAS SKYE BA’I NUS PA’I SKAD CIG PAR {%BAR} MED PA RTEN DU GYUR PA DE LA, GTI MUG GIS ‘JIG RTEN RNAMS DBANG PO GZUGS CAN MIG YIN NO SNYAM DU RTOGS KYI, RNAM SHES LAS THA DAD PA’I MIG DBANG NI YOD PA MIN NO,,

When this deep seed ripens, a later awareness of the eyes springs forth, in a form which follows upon that of the former one.  And then “its”—meaning the eye’s—consciousness becomes the support for a potential which occurs without even a moment’s interval, from the potential that also occurred without even a moment’s interval, for the consciousness itself.  And then out of dark ignorance, people of the world get an idea where they consider this support and think to themselves, “this is the eye, a physical sense power”—even though it’s not the case that there exists any power of the eye which is separate from consciousness itself. 


[2238]
DE BZHIN DU DBANG PO GZUGS CAN LHAG MA LA YANG SBYAR BAR BYA’O,,

You can apply the same explanation to the remainder of the physical sense powers.


[2239]
DE LA MIG SHES SKYE BA’I RGYU BAG CHAGS NI DE’I RGYU’I RKYEN YIN LA, MIG GI [f. 164b] DBANG PO NI MIG SHES KYI BDAG PO’I RKYEN NO,,

Here the deep seed which acts as the cause for the arisal of the visual consciousness is the causal factor for it; whereas the sense power of the eye is the dominant factor.


[2240]
‘DIR MIG DBANG MIG SHES KYI DNGOS RGYUR BSTAN PA NI, MIG SHES SKYE BA’I BAG CHAGS SMIN PA’I SKABS LA DGONGS KYI MIG DBANG GANG YIN LA MIN NO,,

When they describe here the sense power of the eye as the direct cause of the consciousness of the eye, what they have in mind is the point at which the deep seed for the visual consciousness ripens; it is not a reference to the power of the eye itself.


[2241]
DE YANG DBUS MTHA’ LAS,
,DON DANG SEMS CAN BDAG RNAM RIG
,SNANG BA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA NI,
,RAB TU SKYE BO {%SKYE’O} DE DON MED,

Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes puts it this way—

States of consciousness proliferate
Where awareness gives an impression

Of object, person, and self;
No object here exists.


[2242]
CES DON GZUGS SOGS DANG, SEMS CAN DBANG PO LNGAR SNANG BA’I RNAM SHES SKYE’O ZHES GSUNGS PA NI KUN GZHI RNAM SHES YIN LA SLOB DPON BLO BRTAN GYIS KYANG DBANG PO GZUGS CAN RNAMS KUN GZHI’I DMIGS PAR BSHAD PAS, SEMS TZAM PA KUN GZHI KHAS LEN PA RNAMS KYIS KUN GZHI LA DBANG PO GZUGS CAN DU SNANG BA MIG DBANG SOGS SU ‘DOD DO,,

The word “object” here refers to visible form and the rest.  And then they would say that “an awareness arises which appears to be the five powers of a living being”; which is a reference to foundation consciousness.  Here Master Sthiramati explains that the physical sense powers are the object of perception for the foundation consciousness; as such, we can say that members of the Mind Only school who accept a foundation consciousness would assert that what appears to the foundation consciousness as the physical powers is what constitutes the power of the eye and so on.


	[2243]
[VI.63]
Bahir vinā rūpam iha svabījān
nīlādi nirbhāsitayodbhavantīm,
Vijñaptim akṣi prabhavām abuddhvā
grāhyaṃ jano bāhyam avaiti cittāt.

,’DI NA DBANG PO LAS BYUNG RNAM PAR RIG
,PHYI GZUNG MED PAR RANG GI SA BON LAS,
,SNGO SOGS SNANG NYID ‘BYUNG BAR MA RTOGS NAS,
,SKYE BOS PHYI ROL BZUNG BAR SEMS KHAS LEN,

		Here awareness
		That arises from
		The sense powers

		Comes from
		Seeds for it
		In the absence
		Of outer objects.

		Beings though fail
		To understand that
		What arises is just

		The appearance
		Of blue and the like,
			
		Believing that
		What is mind 
		Constitutes outer
		Objects of perception.


[2244]
RNAM SHES LAS THA DAD PA’I MIG DBANG SOGS MED PAR BSTAN NAS, GZUGS KYANG RNAM PAR SHES PA LAS DON GZHAN PA MED PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR SMRAS PA,

Having described how there is no power of the eye or such which is separate from consciousness itself, we have the following description of how form itself is has no existence as an object which is separate from awareness either.


[2245]
‘JIG RTEN ‘DI NA DBANG PO LNGA LAS BYUNG BA’I RNAM PAR RIG PA LNGA, SNGON PO LA SOGS PA’I PHYI ROL GYI GZUNG BA MED PAR RNAM SHES RANG GI SA BON KUN GZHI LA BZHAG PA SMIN PA LAS, SNGO SOGS SU SNANG BA NYID ‘BYUNG BAR MA RTOGS NAS, SKYE BOS SEMS SNGO SOGS SU SNANG BA LA PHYI ROL GYI GZUNG BAR KHAS LEN PA STE MNGON PAR ZHEN NO,,

Here in the world then we have five different types of awareness that arise from the five different sense powers.  Consciousness comes from the ripening of the seeds for it that were planted in the foundation consciousness; and this happens in the absence of any outer objects of perception such as blue or the like.  Beings though fail to understand that what arises is just the appearance of blue and the like; and so they have a strong attraction towards believing that what is actually the mind appearing as blue and the like constitutes outer objects of perception.


[2246]
DE’I PHYIR RNAM SHES LAS DON GZHAN PA’I PHYI ROL MED DO,,

As such, we can say that there exist no outer objects which are separate things from consciousness itself.


	[2247]
[VI.64]
Svapne vinārthāntaram eva rūpaṃ
yathā tadākāram udeti cetaḥ,
Svaśakti pākād iha jāgrato’pi
tathāsti bāhyena vinā manaś cet.

,RMI LAM NA NI GZUGS DON GZHAN MED PAR,
,RANG NUS SMIN LAS DE YI RNAM CAN SEMS,
,’BYUNG BA JI LTA DE BZHIN SAD LA’ANG ‘DIR,
,PHYIR ROL MED PAR YID NI YOD CE NA,

		In a dream,
		There are no physical objects
		Which are other entities.

		The potential for them ripens,
		And from that arises
		A state of mind
		With the aspects of those.

		In this very same way,
		Here when we are awake
		As well, there are none outer;
		What we have is the thought.

		Suppose you take this position.
		

[2248]
BSHAD PA’I RNAM PA GCIG TU NA, RMI LAM NA NI GZUGS DON GZHAN DU GYUR PA MED PAR RANG GI BAG CHAGS KYI NUS PA SMIN PA LAS, GZUGS SGRA SOGS DE’I RNAM PA CAN GYI SEMS ‘BYUNG BA JI LTA BA DE BZHIN DU, [f. 165a] SAD PA’I SKABS LA’ANG ‘DIR PHYI ROL GYI DON MED PAR YID NI YOD DO ZHE NA,

This explanation can take a different twist.  In a dream, there are no physical objects which are other entities.  Rather, the potential of a deep seed for them ripens, and from that arises a state of mind with the aspects of those visible forms, sounds, and the rest.  In this very same way, here during the period when we are awake as well there are no outer objects here; what we have is the thought.  Now suppose this is the position that you take.



Denying Mind Only objects

[2249]
GNYIS PA NI,

Here secondly we deny the position just stated.


	[2250]
[VI.65]
Nīlādi nirbhāsam udeti cetaḥ
svapne yathā mānasam akṣyabhāve,
Kasmād ihāndhasya tathākṣyapāye
svabīja pākād udayaṃ na yāti.

,JI LTAR MIG MED PAR NI RMI LAM DU,
,SNGO SOGS SNANG BA’I YID SEMS ‘BYUNG DE LTAR,
,MIG DBANG MED PAR RANG GI SA BON NI,
,SMIN LAS LONG BA LA ‘DIR CIS MI SKYE,

		In a dream,
		A state of mind
		Comes up which is
		The thought,
	
		And takes on
		An aspect of blue
		Or whatever it may be,

		Even though
		There is no sense power
		Of the eye there.

		A deep seed
		Within it ripens;

		In this case,
		Why wouldn’t a person
		Who was blind
		Come to see?


[2251]
DE NI MI RIGS TE, JI LTAR MIG DBANG MED PAR RMI LAM DU SNGO SOGS SNANG BA’I YID SHES KYI SEMS ‘BYUNG BA DE LTAR DU, MIG DBANG MED PAR RNAM SHES RANG GI SA BON BAG CHAGS NI SMIN PA LAS, SAD PA’I LONG BA LA YANG MA LONG BA LTA BU’I GZUGS MTHONG BA SOGS CI’I PHYIR MI SKYE STE RMI LAM DANG SAD PA GNYIS KAR YANG MIG DBANG MED PAR MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And yet, that position must be wrong.  In a dream, a state of mind comes up which is actually consciousness of the thought, but which takes on an aspect of blue or whatever it may be, even though there is no sense power of the eye there.  And suppose it were the same for consciousness, which in the absence of a sense power of the eye has a seed—a deep seed—within it which ripens.  In this case, why wouldn’t it be the case that—in the waking state—a person who was blind would come to see visible forms just the same as a person who was not blind?  After all, the two cases are similar: they have no sense power of the eye, in both the cases: in the dream, and while awake.


[2252]
‘DI YANG PHYI’I GZUGS SOGS MED PAR RNAM SHES RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA SKYE NA, RMI LAM DANG SAD PA GNYIS KA LA KHYAD MED PA’I GNAD KYIS YIN NO,,

And there is another crucial point to back this up: If an awareness that existed through some nature of its own could arise even in the absence of outer visible form and the like, then there would be no difference between the dream state and the waking state.


[2253]
CI STE SAD PA’I LONG PA LA YID KYI SHES PA GZUGS SOGS GSAL BAR SNANG BA RMI LAM GYI DE LTA BU MI ‘BYUNG BA’I RGYU NI, MIG MED PA MA YIN GYI ‘O NA CI ZHE NA, DE ‘DRA BA’I YID KYI SHES PA ‘BYUNG BA’I NUS PA MA SMIN PA YIN NO,,

But then a question may arise.  In the waking state, the consciousness of the thought for a blind person can take on a vivid aspect of visible form or the like; whereas the same sort of thing does not happen in a dream.  If the reason for this, you may ask, is not the absence of an eye, then what could it be?  What has happened is that the potential for such a consciousness of the thought to occur has not yet ripened.


	[2254]
[VI.66]
Svapne’sti ṣaṣṭhasya hi śakti pāko
na jāgrato’stīti sacet tava syāt,
Yatheha ṣaṣṭhasya na śakti pākaḥ
svapne tathāsann {%?} iti kiṃ na vetsi.

,GAL TE KHYOD LTAR RMI LAM DRUG PA YI,
,NUS PA SMIN YOD SAD PAR MED GYUR NA,
,DRUG PA’I NUS SMIN JI LTA ‘DIR MED PA,
,DE LTAR RMI TSE MED CES CIS MI RIGS,

		Suppose that,
		As you would have it,

		There does exist the
		Ripening of the potential
		For the sixth
		Within a dream;

		And suppose that
		This were absent
		During the waking state.

		Why then wouldn’t it be
		Correct to say that

		Here there was no ripening of
		The potential for the sixth,

		And just so no such thing
		During the dream?


[2255]
DE’I PHYIR NUS PA SMIN PA YOD PA DER DE ‘DRA BA’I YID SHES ‘BYUNG BA YIN LA DE YANG GNYID KYI RKYEN GYIS RMI LAM KHO NA NA YOD KYI SAD PA LA NI MA YIN NO SNYAM NA,

And suppose you think to yourself the following.  It is in the presence of the ripening of the potential that this type of consciousness of the thought occurs.  And due to the factor of the sleep, this is present only in a dream; it is not something that comes during the waking period.


[2256]
DE NI MI RIGS TE, GAL TE KHYOD LTAR RMI LAM NA DRUG PA YID SHES KYI NUS PA SMIN PA YOD LA, SAD PA LA MED PAR GYUR NA DRUG PA YID SHES GZUGS SOGS SU GSAL BAR SNANG BA’I NUS PA SMIN PA SAD PA’I SKABS ‘DIR LONG BA LA MED PA JI LTA BA DE LTAR RMI LAM GYI TSE MED CES CIS MI RIGS TE RIGS SO,,

This idea though is mistaken.  Suppose that, as you would have it, there does exist the ripening of the potential for “the sixth”—that is, the consciousness of the thought—within a dream.  And suppose that this were absent during the waking state.  Why then wouldn’t it be correct to say that—just as for a blind person there is here in the waking state no ripening of the potential for the sixth (the consciousness of the thought) to take on a clear aspect of visible form and the rest—there could, just so, be no such thing during the dream state?  It would in fact be perfectly correct to say so.


[2257]
‘DI YANG DGAG BYA LA GTUGS PA’I LUGS SO,,

This again is a position which boils down to the object that we deny.


[2258]
GAL TE RIGS PA MED PAR TSIG TZAM GYIS DE SKAD SMRA NA, KHO BO CAG GIS KYANG SNGAR LTAR SMRAS PAS CHOG [f. 165b] GO

And if you claim that you are taking your position not out of logic but just nominally, well then you should be satisfied with whatever statements we ourselves made previous to this.


[2259]
,RMI LAM MTHONG BA LA NI SAD PA’I SKABS KYI LONG BA LTAR RNAM SHES KYI RTEN DBANG PO BYED PA DANG BRAL BA’I PHYIR, NUS PA’I MING CAN GYI MIG GI DBANG PO LA RNAM SHES BRTEN PA’I RNAM PA’I RJES SU BYED PA, YID SHES KYI NUS PA SMIN PA YONGS SU ‘GYUR BA LAS BYUNG BA’I YID KYI RNAM SHES CAN MA YIN NO,,

When we see things in a dream, it’s the same as with a blind person during the waking period.  That is, they lack any of the functionality of the sense power acting as a support for consciousness.  As such, what we have is a sense power of the eye which is referred to with the name of “a potential,” and which assumes the aspect of a support for consciousness.  It’s not as if we are possessed of a consciousness of the thought which has sprung from a transformation resulting from the ripening of some potential for this same consciousness.


	[2260]
[VI.67]
Akṣyor abhāvo’sya yathā na hetuḥ
svapne’pi middhaṃ na tathaiva hetuḥ,
Svapne’pi tad rūpam ato’bhyupeyaṃ
cakṣur mṛṣā gocara bodhi hetuḥ.

,JI LTAR MIG MED ‘DI YI RGYU MIN LTAR,
,RMI LAM DU YANG GNYID NI [207b] RGYU MA YIN,
,DE PHYIR RMI LAM DU YANG DE DNGOS MIG
,BRDZUN PA’I YUL CAN RTOGS PA’I RGYUR KHAS BLANG,

		As they do when
		There is no eye,
		For this they are not
		Acting as a cause.

		Just so, in a
		Dream as well,
		Sleep could not be
		The cause [f. 207b].

		For that reason,
		You would accept
That in a dream
As well as that,

There were
False entities
Having objects

As the cause
For the perception
Of the eye.


[2261]
DE’I PHYIR MIG MED PA SAD PA’I LONG BA ‘DI LA DON SNANG GI BAG CHAGS SMIN PA RGYU MIN PA JI LTA BA DE LTAR RMI LAM DU YANG GNYID NI DON SNANG GI BAG CHAGS SMIN PA’I RGYU MA YIN TE, PHYI ROL MED PAR SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA SKYE NA BAG CHAGS SMIN PA LA MI LTOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As such, it’s not as if things are happening here as they do when there is no eye: where, for this person who is blind during the waking state, the ripening of a deep seed for the mind to take on the appearance of the object is not acting as a cause.  Just so, in a dream as well, sleep could not be a cause for the ripening of the deep seed of the mind taking on the aspect of the object.  And that’s because—if it were the case that a state of mind that existed through some nature of its own could grow in the absence of outer objects, then it wouldn’t have to rely upon the ripening of some deep seed.


[2262]
GANG GI PHYIR BAG CHAGS BRDZUN PA LAS RMI LAM GYI DON SNANG GI SHES PA BRDZUN PA SKYE BA DE’I PHYIR, RMI LAM DU YANG SAD PA’I SKABS DE LTA BU’I YUL GYI DNGOS PO GZUGS SOGS SU SNANG BA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA BRDZUN PA DANG, RMI LAM GYI MIG RTOGS PA STE RNAM PAR SHES PA’I RGYU STE RTEN DU GYUR PA KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’O,,

Suppose then that a false state of mind which takes on the aspect of an object in a dream arises from a false version of a deep seed.  For that reason then, you would also have to accept the idea that in a dream as well—just as in that waking state—there would be a false consciousness that was taking on the aspect of visible form and such: these types of entities acting as the same sort of objects.  And these would act as the cause—which is to say, the support—for the consciousness or perception of the eye in the dream.


[2263]
‘DI NI ‘GREL PAR RMI LAM NA YUL YONGS SU GCOD PA NA GSUM ‘DUS PAR DMIGS PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS SHING, YANG RMI LAM NA GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED DANG MIG DANG, DE GNYIS KYIS BSKYED PA’I MIG GI RNAM SHES MED PAR YANG GSUNGS PA

On this point, we see in the autocommentary the statement that “When we descry an object in a dream, we are having a perception where the three have convened.”  We also see statements that—in a dream—there is no door of sense of visible form; or eye; or the consciousness of the eye triggered by these two.


[2264]
BZHIN DU, RMI LAM NA MIG SHES SOGS LNGA’I YUL DBANG RNAM SHES GSUM MED KYANG, RMI LAM RMI BZHIN PA’I GANG ZAG GI NGOR DE GSUM DU DMIGS PA YOD PAS RMI LAM GYI MIG DANG, RMI LAM GYI MIG SHES DANG, RMI LAM GYI GZUGS GSUM PO KHAS BLANG BAR STON GYI,

Just so, we can say that—even though, in a dream, there are none of the three of the object, the power, or consciousness for the five of the consciousness of the eye and so on—there do exist things perceived as these three to the perceptions of the person dreaming the dream.  As such, what these references are saying is that we would have to accept the three of a dream eye; a dream consciousness of the eye; and dream visible form.


[2265]
DE GSUM MIG SOGS SU GRUB PAR ‘DOD PA MIN TE, SGYU [f. 166a] MA’I RTA GLANG DANG SGYU MA’I MI KHAS LEN KYANG, DE DAG RTA GLANG DANG MIR ‘DOD MI DGOS PA BZHIN NO,,

It’s not saying though that we would have to say that these three actually existed as an eye or the like.  That is, we would have to agree that there do exist illusory horses and cows, and illusory people; but that doesn’t mean that we would have to agree that they were horses, or cows, or people.


	[2266]
[VI.68]
Yaṃ yaṃ parīhāram ayaṃ bravīti
taṃ taṃ pratijñāsamam asya paśyan,
Nivārayed vādam amuṃ na Buddhā
vastu kvacin nāma sad ityuśanti

[VI.68a]
,’DI YIS LAN NI GANG DANG GANG BTAB PA,
,DE DANG DE NI DAM BCA’ MTSUNGS MTHONG BAS,
,RTZOD ‘DI SEL BYED

		Whatever response it is
		That these might make,
		We can see that this
		Assertion is equivalent.

		As such,
		This particular argument
		Actually clears the beliefs.


[2267]
DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR NA SEMS TZAM PA ‘DI YIS DBU MA PA LA LAN NI GANG DANG GANG BTAB PA DE DANG DE NI, DAM BCA’ BA STE BSGRUB BYA MA GRUB PA DANG MTSUNGS PAR MTHONG BAS, RTZOD ‘DI STE RNAM PAR RIG PA TZAM DU SMRA BA ‘DI SEL BA STE ZLOG PAR BYAD {%BYED} DO,,

And so thus, given this we can say that whatever response it is that these proponents of the Mind Only school might make to those of the Middle Way, we can see that this assertion is equivalent to a logical proof which doesn’t hold.  As such, this particular argument actually “clears” the beliefs of those who say that there is nothing but awareness; which is to say, it blocks them. 


[2268]
DE DAG DPER BRJOD NA DBU MA PAS SAD PA’I SKABS KYI YUL DBANG RNAM SHES GSUM RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA YIN TE, DMIGS PA YIN PA’I PHYIR RMI LAM BZHIN NO, ZHES BKOD PA NA

And so let’s say for example that those of the Middle Way were to set forth the logic that these three, when we are awake—the object, the sense power, and the consciousness—are empty of existing through any nature of their own, simply because they are observed: they are like a dream.


[2269]
SEMS TZAM PAS SAD PA’I RNAM SHES NI PHYI ROL GYI DON GYIS STONG STE, RNAM SHES YIN PA’I PHYIR RMI LAM GYI RNAM SHES BZHIN NO ZHES DANG,

Those of the Mind Only would reply by saying that our consciousness, when we are awake, is devoid of any outer object; for the simple reason that it is consciousness.  It is like, they would say, our consciousness in a dream.


[2270]
SAD PA’I SKABS SU DMIGS PA’I YUL NI BRDZUN PA YIN TE, YUL YIN PA’I PHYIR RMI LAM GYI YUL BZHIN NO, ZHES DANG,

They would also say that, when we are awake, the object under our consideration is deceptive, simply because it is an object.  And again, that is because it is like an object in a dream.


[2271]
DE BZHIN DU KUN BYANG GI GZHI GZHAN DBANG MED NA KUN BYANG MED PA YIN TE, RTEN MED PA’I PHYIR, RUS SBAL GYI SPU’I GOS BZHIN NO, ZHES SMRA’O

They would also say that—if there were no dominated entities to serve as the basis of both the negative and the enlightened side of things—then there could in fact be no vast negativity or pure enlightenment themselves; it would be, they say, like clothing woven from the hairs that grow on the shell of a turtle.


[2272]
DE BZHIN DU RAB RIB KYI DPES KYANG BRJOD PAR BYA’O, ZHES PA RNAMS SO,,

And they would also say, “We further use the example of eyes with cataracts, in describing these cases.”


[2273]
DE LA SBYOR BA DANG PO GNYIS NI, DPE MA GRUB PAS SGRUB BYED BSGRUB BYA DANG MTSUNGS PA YIN TE, RMI LAM NA YID KYI SHES PA LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED KYI GZUGS YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As for the first two logical sentiments expressed here, we can say that since the example cited isn’t correct, what is being used to prove the idea and the idea that they are trying to prove end up being equivalent.  And that’s because, in a dream, there does exist form of the sense door of phenomena which is essentially separate from consciousness of the thought.


[2274]
SBYOR BA GSUM PA NI, KUN BYANG GI RTEN RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA CIG SGRUB ‘DOD PA YIN PAS DE LA NI, RTEN TZAM MED PA MA GRUB PA YIN LA, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA LA BSAMS NA NI MA NGES PA’O,,

As for the third logical thought expessed above, they seek to establish that there is a foundation to the negative side of things—and to the enlightened side of things—which could exist by definition.  Proving this foundation in its simple form is simply an argument that is not proven to be true; whereas if what they have in mind is specifically something that could exist by definition, then the proof is inconclusive.



Scripture can deny Mind Only

[2275]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third step from before: showing how there is no problem from scripture when we deny the system of the Mind Only.


	[2276]
	[VI.68b]
…SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS NI,
,’GAR YANG DNGOS PO YOD CES MA BSTAN TO,

	The Buddhas have not
	Ever taught the idea,

	In any at all, that
	Entities could exist.


[2277]
DE [f. 166b] LTAR SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS BKAG PA LA RIGS PAS MI GNOD PAR MA ZAD, LUNG GIS GNOD PA SRID PA MA YIN TE, GANG GI PHYIR YANG DAG PAR RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS NI, RANG GI LUGS LA GSUNG RAB ‘GAR YANG DNGOS PO BDEN PAR YOD CES MA BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now not only is it the case that our denying the system of the Mind Only school is, therefore, something that cannot be disproven by logic; moreover, it is further a position where there is no problem with it from scripture.  And this is because the total and perfectly enlightened Buddhas have not—in expressing the position that they themselves adhere to—ever taught the idea, in any at all of the teachings they have given, that entities could exist in reality.


[2278]
DE YANG LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS,
,SRID PA GSUM NI BTAGS PA TZAM,
,NGO BO NYID KYIS DNGOS PO MED,
,BTAGS PA DNGOS PO’I NGO BOR NI,
,RTOG GE BA DAG RTOG PAR ‘GYUR,

As the Journey to Langka puts it,

	The three realms of existence
	Are nothing but labels;
	Nothing at all exists
	Through some essence of its own.

	Seeing some essence to things
	That exist only in labels
	Is just an idea thought up
	By some who think it is logic.


	[2279]
,RANG BZHIN MED CING RNAM RIG MED,
,KUN GZHI MED CING DNGOS MED NA,
,BYIS PA NGAN PA RTOG GE BA,
,RO DANG ‘DRA BAS ‘DI DAG BRTAGS,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,


	Things have no nature;
	There is no awareness;
	There is no foundation consciousness;
	There exists no thing at all.

	Those unruly infants,
	Those so-called logical thinkers,
	So similar to dead bodies,
	Have made it all up.


[2280]
RKANG PA DANG POS SRID GSUM BLOS BTAGS PA TZAM DU YOD PAR BSTAN LA, RKANG PA GNYIS PAS NI DE’I DON BSTAN TE, DE YANG NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I DNGOS PO MED PAR BSTAN PAS, NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PA YIN GYI DNGOS PO YE MED MIN ZHES PA’O,,

The first line here [in the Tibetan; the first two lines in the English] are meant to indicate that the three realms into which the entire universe is divided exist only as something labeled by the mind.  The second line [third and fourth in the English] are meant to explain what this means; that is—by showing how there can be no entity which exists in & of itself—we are saying that there is nothing which exists in & of itself, but not that nothing exists at all.


[2281]
DE LTAR BLOS BTAGS PA TZAM LA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I DNGOS POR DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON MA RNYED PA’I RTOG GE PAS ‘DOD DO ZHES PA NI, BTAGS PA ZHES PA GNYIS KYIS STON NO,,

And what the two mentions of “labels” are meant to indicate is that the idea that what is—in actuality—merely a creation of the mind could exist as an entity which existed in & of itself is only something that could be asserted by a person trying to think logically who had yet to discover the true meaning of suchness.


[2282]
NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PAR SPYIR BSTAN PA STE, BYE BRAG TU PHYE STE STON PA NI, R’U PA ZHES PA RANG BZHIN DANG GZUGS GNYIS KA LA ‘JUG PA LAS ‘DIR GZUGS CAN LA BYA STE, RNAM RIG CES PA’I ZLA STOBS KYIS SO,,

Saying that things don’t exist in & of themselves is the general presentation; if we were to break things down more particularly, we would point out that the Sanskrit word rūpa can refer both to “nature” and to “form”; and that here, it is meant to allude to things which possess physical form.  This physicality is indicated here in the lines in the form of what they call a “contrasting poeticism,” with the word “awareness.”


[2283]
DNGOS MED CES PA’I DNGOS PO NI SHES PA DANG GZUGS CAN GYI DNGOS PO MED PAR BSTAN ZIN PAS, ‘DIR NGO BO LA YIN LA DE YANG DNGOS PO BDEN PA BKAG PA’I NGO BO DANG, DNGOS POR MED PA GZHAN RNAMS LA BYA’O,,

As for the line which says “there exists no thing at all,” the fact is that we have already in the lines previous presented the idea that there exist no mental or physical entities.  The reference at this point then is to existing in essence; and here we mean “essence” in the sense we see it when we deny that things are real—and to other connotations of the expression that nothing exists in actual fact.


[2284]
RO DANG ‘DRA TSUL [f. 167a] NI DE KHO NA NYID DPYOD NUS PA’I SEMS MED PA’O,,

How is it then that the thinkers referred to are “similar to dead bodies”?  The point is that they have no awareness—in the sense of being able to explore the concept of suchness.


[2285]
LUNG DES NI KHAMS GSUM GYI GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR ‘DOD PA BKAG GO

The entire citation then is meant to deny an entire universe of three realms where dominated entities could be said to exist through some nature of their own.


[2286]
,GAL TE LUNG DE DAG GIS GCIG GZHAN DBANG LA CIG SHOS KUN BRTAGS GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD KYI NGO BO NYID KYIS STONG PA BSTAN PAS MI GNOD DO SNYAM NA,

Suppose the following thought were to occur to someone:

The actual purpose of these lines is to say that the one type of things, dominated entities; and then the other type of things, imagined entities, are empty of an essential nature where objects and subject states of mind are essentially different from one another.  As such, the citation does not draw our position into question.


[2287]
DE ‘DRA DE NI YANG DAG PA’I STONG NYID DU RIGS PA MA YIN TE, BLO GROS CHEN PO GCIG LA GCIG MED PA’I STONG PA NYID NI STONG PA NYID THAMS CAD KYI THA SHAL YIN NO ZHES LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Saying that this sort of description represents pure emptiness though would not be logical.  And that’s because the Journey to Langka itself includes that part that says,

O one of great understanding, that emptiness which is said to apply to one thing but is lacking in another thing is the very worst of all attempted explanations of emptiness.


[2288]
BA LANG NI RTA YIN PAS STONG PA’I PHYIR YOD PA MIN NO ZHES BRJOD PA NI RIGS PA YANG MA YIN TE, RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS YOD PA’I PHYIR, ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA BRJOD PAR BYA’O ZHES ‘GREL PAR GSUNGS SO,,

The autocommentary also notes—

You would have to say things like: “It would be incorrect to say that, because a cow is empty of being a horse, it didn’t exist at all.  After all, it exists in & of itself.”


[2289]
BDAG NYID KYIS ZHES PA LA NAG TSOS RANG GI BDAG NYID YOD PA’I PHYIR RO ZHES BSGYUR BA LEGS SO,,

Where this version of the autocommentary says “in & of itself,” the translation by Naktso reads “because its very self is there”; this is a good way of rendering it.


[2290]
GCIG LA CIG SHOS MED PA’I STONG PA ‘DI DPER BRJOD DE DANG ‘DRA BAR ‘GYUR TSUL NI BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYI RANG BZHIN GYIS DBEN PA’I STONG NYID GSUNGS PA NI SEMS CAN RNAMS THOG MA MED PA NAS GZUGS SOGS KYI DNGOS PO LA BDEN PAR GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I MNGON ZHEN BZLOG PA’I PHYIR DU YIN PA LA,

Now let’s consider this approach, where—as in the example just cited—we speak of emptiness as one thing lacking another.  When the conquering Buddhas make statements like this, about an emptiness where things are devoid of any nature, the reason they do so is to stop the belief of living beings, for time with no beginning, where they grasp to the idea that entities such as form and the like could exist as real.


[2291]
DE LA GZUGS SOGS SU SNANG BA’I GZHAN DBANG ‘DI NYID BDEN PAR MA GRUB PAR BSTAN DGOS PA LA, DE LTAR MI STON PAR GZHAN DBANG ‘DI GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD PAR MI BDEN NO ZHES BSTAN PA NA, BA LANG MED PA’I RGYU MTSAN DU BA LANG LTAR MED CES ZER BA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

To this point, one has to demonstrate that dominated entities which appear as form or the like cannot exist in reality.  And suppose that we do not present it that way, and only indicate that these dominated things are not real in the sense of objects & subjects which are essentially different.  This would be like saying—as a reason for asserting that a cow doesn’t exist—that “it doesn’t exist, because it’s similar to the case with a cow.”


[2292]
DES NA DBU [f. 167b] SEMS SU YI LUGS LA YANG SEMS CAN RNAMS GANG LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PA’I GZHI, PHYI NANG GI CHOS SU SNANG BA ‘DI DAG LA BYED PA LA NI MI ‘DRA BA MED LA, DE RNAMS STONG PAR STON PA NI GZHI DE LA MNGON ZHEN ZLOG PA’I PHYIR DU YIN PA YANG ‘DRA MOD KYANG, ZHEN TSUL LA MI MTHUN TE

Thus we can say that—whether we are speaking about the system of the Middle Way, or to that of the Mind Only—there is no difference in the fact that we are referring to the way that outer & inner entities make their appearance: we are speaking of that foundational state of things which living beings are holding on to.  When we clarify that these things are empty, the statement in each of the two systems is similar in that we are attempting to put a stop to how people hold on to this foundation; and yet the way in which each system describes the holding on that people do is incompatible.


[2293]
SEMS TZAM PAS NI GZUNG ‘DZIN GNYIS PHYI NANG DU RGYANGS CHAD DU SNANG BA LA SNANG BA LTAR DU, GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD DU ZHEN PA YIN LA, DE’I GNYEN POR SNANG BA GZHAN DBANG ‘DI CHOS CAN DU BZUNG NAS, GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD DU YOD PA ‘GOG PA YIN PAS DGAG GZHI DE DGAG BYA DE YIN PA ‘GOG PA YIN NO,,

That is, the Mind Only would say that the belief that people hold to here is that objects and their subjects are essentially separate, as they appear to be when it seems that—for the objects and subjects—those which are inside of us and those which are outside look to exist at a significant distance away from each other.  And then as an antidote for this perception, we take what it is that appears—dominated entities—and take them as the subject under logical consideration, and then disprove that it could display any reality where objects & their subjects were essentially separate.  Thus, the denial is done by taking this foundational state of things that we deny itself as the object we are denying, and work to deny that.


[2294]
DBU MA PA LTAR NA ZHEN TSUL NI SNANG BA LA THA SNYAD PA’I BLOS BZHAG PA MIN PA’I BDEN GRUB TU ZHEN PA YIN LA, DE’I GNYEN POR SNANG BA ‘DI CHOS CAN DU BZUNG NAS, DE ‘DRA BA’I BDEN PAR MED CES ‘GOG STE, 

Those of the Middle Way describe the belief with which we hold to things in a different way.  They say that we hold that things exist in reality—which is to say, we believe that what appears to us is not being established by a nominal state of mind.  And then as an antidote for this belief, we start by taking this way that things appear to us as the subject under our logical consideration.  Then we deny this appearance by saying, “This is not something which exists as real, in the way we have described that.”


[2295]
DE YANG DGAG GZHI DE DGAG BYA YIN PA ‘GOG PA YIN TE, SEMS CAN GYIS ZHEN PA NA GZHI DE LA DGAG BYA DE DON GZHAN DU YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA MIN PAR, GZHI DE DGAG BYA DE’I NGO BOR ZHEN PA’I PHYIR DANG, STONG PA YANG JI LTAR ZHEN PA DE LTAR DU YOD PAS STONG PAR BSTAN DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This denial is a refusal that the objects which make up the foundation state where we are accomplishing our denial could in fact exist as what we are denying about them.  This is not to say that when living beings are engaging in what they believe, they hold this foundation state to exist in some other way than that expressed by the object that we deny; rather, they actually hold that this state exists, in its very essence, as expressed by the object that we deny.  Moreover, we have to demonstrate as well that emptiness itself is also empty of existing in the way that we might believe it to.


[2296]
DE’I PHYIR DA LTAR GYI SNANG GZHI RNAMS BDEN PAS STONG PA CHAD STONG DU BYAS TE, ‘DI DAG BOR NAS SNANG BA GZHAN CIG LA STONG GZHIR BYAS TE, DGAG BYA DE YIN PAS STONG PAR MI STON PAR DNGOS PO YOD PAS STONG PAR STON PA NI,

As such, the foundational state we are talking about here—the one that appears to us—is what we are saying is empty: what we are eliminating to arrive at emptiness.  But suppose that a person were to reject these elements, and take something completely different to be that foundational state which we are saying is empty.  That is, suppose a person decided not to describe emptiness as being the lack of the object denied, as we have described it.  Suppose—rather—that what entities were empty of was their very existence.


[2297]
DBU SEMS SU’I YANG LUGS MIN LA, SEMS CAN GYI RGYUD KYI THOG MA MED PA’I MNGON ZHEN LA DE ‘DRA BA’I DGAG BYA ‘DZIN PA’I BLO ‘DUG MI [f. 168a] ‘DUG KYANG KHA NANG DU LOG LA RTOGS SHIG

This then would be a system that belonged neither to the Middle Way nor to the Mind Only.  And so we would ask people like this to turn their thoughts inside of themselves, to see whether they are able to discover, or not discover, that kind of belief in things which has existed in the minds of living beings for time with no beginning; and check to see just what kind of object to be denied that your thoughts may be grasping to.


[2298]
,DE NAS DPAL LDAN CHOS KYI GRAGS PAS,
,’DI LA’ANG RJES SU BRJOD PA YOD,
,DES NA NGAN PA’I MUN PAS KHYAB,
CES GSUNGS TE, ‘DI ‘DRA BA RNAMS SHIN TU BDO BA’I DUS SU SNANG BA RNAM DPYOD CAN GYIS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And thus it is that the glorious Dharmakirti has said,

They even say
It could be this way;

As such, we can say
They are smothered in dark.

The point here is that those who are possessed of true discernment should be aware that we are living in times when these kinds of ideas have spread quite widely.


[2299]
‘DIR ‘GREL PA LAS, YAB SRAS MJAL BA’I MDO LAS DBANG PO NYER GNYIS RANG BZHIN MED PAR GTAN LA PHAB PA DRANGS PA LAS, ‘DI LTAR MING DU GDAGS PAR BAS KYI, DON DAM PAR NI MIG DANG DBANG PO MI DMIGS SO, ZHES PA DANG,

We see this in the autocommentary, at the point were it is citing the way in which the sutra known as The Meeting of the Father & Son sets forth how the 22 powers have no nature of their own.  Here it says, “Things then are like this, existing as labelled in names; but there exists no eye, and no sense power, in any ultimate sense.”


[2300]
DE BZHIN DU CHOS THAMS CAD KYANG NGO BO NYID KYIS DMIGS SU MA MCHIS PA STE, ZHES CHOS RNAMS MING DU BTAGS PA TZAM DU ZAD KYI DON DAM PAR DANG, NGO BO NYID KYIS MA MCHIS PAR GSUNGS PAS,

Along the same lines we see, “It is not a possibility that any existing entity could be present through some essence of its own.”  What this is saying is that all existing things are nothing more than labelled in names, and that is the end of it; it is not possible for things to exist ultimately, or through some essential nature of their own.


[2301]
DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR SBYOR BA LA DE GNYIS RNAM GRANGS PA DANG, RANG GI RNAM GZHAG ‘JOG PA’I PHYOGS THAMS CAD MING DU BTAGS PA TZAM GYIS BYED PAR GSUNGS SHING,

Given this description, the two qualifications applied to the object we are denying are synonymous; and what’s being said is that all the positions being taken to establish a system are accomplished through simple creation by labels.


[2302]
RMI LAM NA DGA’ RTZED BYED PA’I YUL DE RNAMS RMI LAM NA YANG DES DE DAG MA RNYED NA SAD PA’I TSE LTA CI SMOS ZHES GSUNGS SHING DE ‘DRA MANG BAS RMI LAM GYI MI DANG, SAD DUS KYI MI LA MI YIN MIN KHYAD PAR MED CES SMRA BA NI,

And so we see those references where they talk about how there are places where we take our sport in a dream; but how, even in the dream, one cannot find them—and so how much more is this the case, when we are awake?  And then people say, since there are so many such allusions in the scriptures, that there is no difference between a person in a dream and a person during the waking hours.


[2303]
SHIN TU MI ‘THAD DE DGA’ RTZED KYI GROGS BYED PA’I SEMS CAN DE RNAMS RMI LAM GYI DUS SU YANG SEMS CAN DE DAG TU MA RNYED PAR GSUNGS SHING, SAD DUS SU DE DAG RNYED PA GZHAG DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This though is incorrect in the extreme.  There are, after all, statements in scripture about how—even during the dream—beings who join into the play of enjoyment cannot be located as beings.  And they describe how we would have to say that, during the waking hours, we would be able to find them.


[2304]
DES NA RMI LAM DU MIG SHES LA SOGS PA’I DBANG SHES YOD PA ‘DI’I LUGS SU SMRA BA NI [f. 168b] NOR PA CHEN POR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

As such, you should understand that when people say that according to this system there do exist consciousness of the eye and such inside a dream, this is a massive error.


[2305]
DE LTAR NA SEMS TZAM PA NGES DON MTHAR THUG PA RTOGS PA’I SHES RAB KYI RTZAL MED PAR GRUB PA’I MTHAR SBYAR BA ‘DI BSAL BAR BYA BA KHO NA’O,,

And so we can say that this attempt to depict the Mind Only as a school of thought that completely lacks any dexterity in the wisdom needed to perceive the ultimate intended meaning is an idea that should only be refused.



No contradiction with the repulsive

[2306]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third section from before: a demonstration that there is no contradiction between this particular denial, and the meditation on the repulsive.


[2307]
GAL TE PHYI YI YUL MED PAR GZUGS SGRA SOGS GSAL BAR SNANG BA’I SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED NA, BLA MA’I MAN NGAG LAS MI SDUG PA SGOM PA’I RNAL ‘BYOR PA RNAMS KYIS, SA GZHI KENG RUS KYIS GANG BAR MTHONG BA DE JI LTAR ‘THAD DE, KENG RUS NI MED KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RNAM SHES NI YOD PA’I PHYIR RO SNYAM NA,

One may come next with the following thought:

Well then, suppose it is the case that—even in a total absence of outer objects—the consciousness which so clearly takes on the aspect of visual form, sound, and the rest does not exist as something with some nature of its own.  How then can it be correct for those great pracitioners who are following the advices of their spiritual teachers, and meditating upon the repulsive, to see the entire surface of the earth covered with skeletons?  Because it must then be the case that—even though these skeletons don’t actually exist—there is present some awareness which exists through a nature of its own.


	[2308]
[VI.69]
Pūrṇāṃ mahīṃ saṅkalayā ca yogī
gurūpadeśād api yat paraiti,
Tatrāpi paśyet trayam apyajātaṃ
mithyā manaskāra tayopadeśāt.

,RNAL ‘BYOR PA YIS BLA MA’I MAN NGAG LAS,
,KENG RUS KYIS GANG SA GZHI MTHONG BA GANG,
,DER YANG GSUM CHAR SKYE BA MED PAR MTHONG,
,LOG PA YID LA BYED PA BSTAN PHYIR RO,

		There is that case
		Where high practitioners
		Follow the advice
		Of their spiritual teachers,
		
		And see the entire
		Surface of the earth
		Covered with skeletons.

		There also they see,
		In the absence
Of all three arising.

And that’s because
It has been described
As a mistaken
Bringing to the mind.
		

[2309]
MI SDUG PA SGOM PA’I RNAL ‘BYOR PA YIS BLA MA’I MAN NGAG LAS, KENG RUS KYIS SA GZHI GANG BAR MTHONG BA GANG YIN PA DER YANG YUL DBANG RNAM SHES GSUM CHAR RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PAR MTHONG STE, TING NGE ‘DZIN DE NI LOG PA STE DE KHO NA NYID MA YIN PA YID LA BYED PAR BSTAN PA STE MDO LAS GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

In reply, let’s consider that case where high practitioners meditating on the repulsive follow the advices of their spiritual teachers, and see the entire surface of the earth covered with skeletons.  There also they see these things even in the absence of all three—the object, the sense power, and the consciousness—arising through some nature of their own.  And that’s because this meditative focus has been described—spoken—in the sutras as being mistaken; which is to say, it consists of bringing to mind something which is not actually the way things are.


[2310]
KENG RUS SNANG BA’I SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB NA, DE’I SNANG BA YANG DE LTAR ‘GYUR BAS YID BYED DE DE KHO NA NYID KYI YUL CAN DU ‘GYUR RO,,

If awareness that had taken on the aspect of skeletons existed through some nature of its own, then the aspect that it takes on would also have to be the same.  And in that case, this particular way of focusing the mind would have to have, as its object, something that represented the way that things actually are.


[2311]
‘DI NI GDON MI ZA BAR DE LTAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’O,,

This fact is something that you would also be compelled to accept, as we have just described it.


	[2312]
[VI.70]
Yathā’kṣi buddhau viṣayākṛtis te
tathāśubhāyāṃ manaso yadi syāt,
Tad deśa buddher itarasya tadvat
syād eva bodho na mṛṣā ca tat syāt.

,KHYOD KYI DBANG BLO’I YUL RNAMS JI LTA BA,
,DE LTAR MI SDUG YID KYI YANG ‘GYUR NA,
,DE BZHIN YUL DER BLO GTAD CIG SHOS KYIS,
,RTOGS ‘BYUNG DE NI BRDZUN PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR,

		Suppose you have
		Objects of the awareness
		Of a sense power,
		And the same
		For all of them.

		Just so,
For certain others
There should also
Be a perception,
A mind of the repulsive,

When they direct
Their minds towards
The same objects:
The perception 
Should also occur.

Neither would this
Be deceptive.


[2313]
DE LTA MA YIN NA KHYOD KYI ZLOS GAR GYI LTAD MO LA SOGS PA LTA BA NA YUL DER MIG GTAD PA RNAMS LAS JI LTAR GANG ZAG GCIG LA DBANG PO’I BLO MIG GI RNAM PAR SHES PA YUL DE’I RNAM PA CAN SKYE BA DE BZHIN DU STE DE ‘DRA BA’I RNAM PA CAN LTAD MO BA GZHAN RNAMS LA YANG SKYE BA

If this were not the way it is, then let’s consider a case where you have a group of audience members who are sitting watching a dance performance, or something of the like.  The visual consciousness of one of these people—their awareness of their sense power—arises in the aspect of this particular object of perception.  But at the same time, a state of mind also arises in all those other spectators which is the same, meaning that it takes on a very similar aspect.


[2314]
JI LTA BA DE LTAR DU, MI SDUG PA’I YID CAN GYI RNAL ‘BYOR PA [f. 169a] LTAR CIG SHOS TE RNAL ‘BYOR PA MA YIN PAS, RNAL ‘BYOR BAS KENG RUS MTHONG BA’I YUL DER BLO GTAD PA STE KENG RUS LA SOGS PA’I YUL LA LTA ‘DOD PA RNAMS LA YANG KENG RUS RTOGS PA STE MTHONG BA SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE, SNGON PO SOGS KYI RNAM SHES BZHIN NO,,

Just so—in the same way—we can have a case where there is a certain other individual who is not a deep practitioner; which is to say, they are not like the deep practitioner whose mind has taken on an aspect of the repulsive.  It should be the case then that if they decide they would like to look upon the skeletons (or whatever else it may be)—if they were to direct their minds towards the same objects where the deep practitioner perceives skeletons—then a perception of the skeletons, that sight, should also arise in them.  It would be just the same as the perception of blue and the like.


[2315]
‘DIR ‘GREL PA DANG BSTUN NA,
,KHYOD KYI DBANG BLO’I YUL GTAD JI LTA BA,
,DE LTAR MI SDUG YID CAN DE BZHIN DU,
,YUL DER BLO GTAD CIG SHOS RNAMS LA YANG,
,SKYE ‘GYUR DE NI BRDZUN PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR,
ZHES PA’I ‘GYUR CIG THOB PAR SNANG NGO,,

If we were to match these thoughts up to the autocommentary at this point, then it would seem that we could come up with a translation of the same lines as follows—

You direct your awareness
Of the powers of sense
In a certain way,

And they take on thus
A certain aspect;

Just so,
When the mind is directed
Towards a certain object,
Then it should arise
For the other ones as well;

Neither would this be
Deceptive.


[2316]
TING NGE ‘DZIN ‘DI BRDZUN PAR TE LOG PA’I DON YID LA BYED PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR RO,,

Neither is it the case that this meditative concentration would be deceptive; which is to say, you would not be directing your mind towards something mistaken.


[2317]
RNAL ‘BYOR PA YIN MIN MGO MTSUNGS MDZAD PA YANG, SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YIN NA KENG RUS KYI MAN NGAG SGOM PA LA LTOS PA ‘GOG NUS PA’I GNAD KYIS YIN NO,,

This is true because of a crucial point here.  Even if we were to say that the two observers were the same—in either being a deep practitioner, or not—in a case where their states of mind existed through some nature of their own, we would be able to deny that they were relying on a meditation upon the advices for the practice of the skeletons.


	[2318]
[VI.71]
Toyaṃ vahantyām api pūya buddhiḥ
pretasya nadyāṃ timirākṣa tulyā,
Saṃkṣepatas tvartham amuṃ paraihi
jñeyaṃ yathā nāstyapi dhīs tatheti.

[VI.71a]
,RAB RIB DANG LDAN DBANG PO CAN MTSUNGS LA,
,CHU ‘BAB RLUNG {%KLUNG} LA YI DAGS {%DVAGS}
	RNAG BLO YANG,

	For cases equivalent
To a state of mind 
With a sense power
That has cataracts,

There is also
The state of mind
Of pus for those
Craving spirits

Towards a stream
Of fresh water.


[2319]
DE BZHIN DU RAB RIB DANG LDAN PA’I DBANG PO CAN DANG MTSUNGS PA’I SGYU MA DANG GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS DPER ‘GOD PA LA YANG LAN GDAB TSUL SHES PAR BYA LA, CHU ‘BAB PA’I KLUNG LA YI DVAGS RNAMS LA RNAG KHRAG GI BLO SKYE BA LA YANG SNGA MA BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

You can understand, in the same way, how to reply as well to cases where someone sets forth—as an example—an illusion, or a reflection in a mirror, as being equivalent to a state of mind with a sense power that has cataracts.  And you should also understand, in the same way, the illustration of when a state of mind arises in craving spirits wherein they perceive a stream of fresh water as being pus & blood.


[2320]
DE LA CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED KYI GZUGS LNGA NI DNGOS POR SMRA BA’I GRUB MTHAS BTAGS PA MIN GYI, MDO LAS GSUNGS SHING RANG NYID KYANG DE LTAR DU BZHED DO,,

Now the five types of form relating to the sense door of all things are not something simply imputed by the school of thought known as the Functionalists.  Rather, they have been stated in sutra, and we also accept them as being such.


[2321]
DE’I PHYIR KENG RUS MED KYANG DE GSAL BAR SNANG BA NI, GZUGS BRNYAN DANG ‘DRA BAR GZUGS CAN DU ‘DOD DGOS LA, ‘DI YID SHES KHO NA LA SNANG BA YIN PAS, GZUGS BRNYAN BZHIN DU GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED MIN LA, SKYE MCHED [f. 169b] GZUGS CAN LHAG MA DGU YANG MIN PAS CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED KYI GZUGS KUN BRTAGS PA ZHES ‘BYUNG BA’O,,

As such, even though the skeletons don’t really exist, we do have to accept that the vivid aspect of them does exist; and that it involves form, in the same way that a reflection in the mirror does.  And so despite the fact that the image of the skeletons is not, like the reflection in a mirror, something possessed of form, neither does it belong to any of the remaining nine doors of sense of form.  And this means that it constitutes form within the sense door of all things, and can be referred to as an imaginary form.


[2322]
MIG SHES LA SKRA SHAD DU SNANG BA NI GZUGS BRNYAN BZHIN DU GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED DO,,

When a strand of hair makes its appearance to the consciousness of the eye it belongs, like a reflection in a mirror, to the sense door of visible form.


[2323]
YI DVAGS LA CHU KLUNG RNAG KHRAG TU SNANG BA NI DE’I MIG SHES LA SNANG BA YIN PAS GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED DU GZHAG DGOS SO,,

When a stream of clear water appears, to a craving spirit, as though it were pus & blood, it is making its appearance to the consciousness of the eye.  As such, we would have to  categorize it too as belonging to the sense door of visible form.


[2324]
THEG BSDUS LAS KYANG,
,YI DVAGS DUD ‘GRO MI RNAMS DANG,
,LHA RNAMS JI LTAR RIGS RIGS SU,
,DNGOS GCIG YID NI THA DAD PHYIR,
,DON MA GRUB PAR ‘DOD PA YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS SHING,

The Compendium of the Greater Way puts it this way:

Since a single entity
Is separate things

To a craving spirit,
And a human,
And a worldly god,

Each according
To their type,

We assert that
It cannot exist
In fact.


[2325]
‘DI LA THEG BSDUS SU DNGOS PO GCIG GANG YIN DANG, SO SOR MTHONG TSUL GSAL BAR MA BSHAD DO,,

This compendium though does not clearly state what the one entity is, nor the individual ways in which it is seen.


[2326]
DE’I BSHAD SBYAR DGE BSNYEN BTZUN PAS MDZAD PAR, CHU KLUNG GI DNGOS PO LA RANG RANG GI LAS KYI RNAM SMIN GYI DBANG GIS YI DVAGS KYIS RNAG LA SOGS PAS GANG BAR MTHONG BA DANG, DE NYID LA DUD ‘GRO NYA LA SOGS PAS GNAS KYI BLOS GNAS PAR BYED PA DANG,

The explanation of this work by the layperson with lifetime vows named “Holy One” though does give the following explanation—

Each one, according to the power of their own karmic ripening, sees the stream of fresh water in a different way.  The craving spirit sees it filled with pus and the like.  An animal like a fish or the like sees the very same object as being their home, and they want to reside in it.  


[2327]
MI RNAMS KYIS NI MNGAR BA DANG DVANGS PA DANG BSIL BA’I CHUR RTOG CING KHRUS BYED DO, ,’THUNG NGO DER ‘JUG GO ,NAM MKHA’ MTHA’ YAS SKYE MCHED LA SNYOMS PAR ZHUGS PA’I LHA RNAMS KYIS NI NAM MKHAR MTHONG STE, GZUGS KYI ‘DU SHES RNAM PAR BSHIG PA’I PHYIR RO ZHES BSHAD DO,,

Human beings perceive it as water which is sweet and clear and cool, and relate to it by saying, “I’ll take a bath in it,” or “I’ll take a drink from it.”  Those worldly gods who are deep in meditation upon the absorption known as “Limitless Space” see the same thing as empty space, for their conception of it as form has dissolved completely.


[2328]
‘DI LA ‘DI SNYAM DU ‘GRO BA DE DAG GI MTHONG BA NI THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MA YIN LA, GZHI GCIG MI MTHUN PA DE DAG TU TSAD MAS GRUB NA RNAG KHRAG DANG RNAL KHRAG MA YIN PA GNYIS MI ‘GAL ZHING, TSAD MAS GRUB PA LA YANG YID BRTAN MED PAR ‘GYUR RO ZHE NA,

One may feel the following concerns about this citation:

The way that these different beings see things is a nominal form of accurate perception; and if these incompatible perceptions of a single base object are all confirmed with an accurate perception, then it must be the case that being blood and pus, and not being blood and pus, are not two incompatible states.  It also throws into the question the whole process of confirming things with accurate perception.


[2329]
‘DI LA GZHUNG DON DE LTAR GO BAS [f. 170a] DE BZHIN DU BZHAG NA TSAD MA LA YID BRTAN MI ‘GYUR BAR ‘GYUR NA, DE YANG MI RUNG BAS JI LTAR YIN ZHES ‘DRI NA RTOG LDAN GYI DRI BA YIN NO,,

If we understand the the quotation in that manner and decide that things must be this way, then it would indeed seem as though accurate perception itself were drawn into question.  That in itself would be unacceptable, and so it is an insightful question to ask what’s going on here!


[2330]
DE LTAR GO BA DE’I DON YIN PAR BZUNG NAS TSAD MAS GRUB PA LA YID BRTAN MED DO ZHES SMRA NA NI, DON ‘DI KHO BOS ‘DI LTAR RTOGS SO ZHES PA GCIG KYANG GZHAG TU MED CING, TSAD MA THAMS CAD LA SKUR PA ‘DEBS PAS NA SHIN TU MI ‘THAD PA’O,,

But if you do take this interpretation of the matter as what the lines are referring to, and say that they draw into question the principle of things being confirmed with accurate perception, it doesn’t seem as though you have a single concept to point to which you from your side would say represented your stand on the question.  And it would be a massive error to discount each and every form of accurate perception.


[2331]
‘O NA JI LTAR ZHE NA THOG MAR DPE BSHAD PAR BYA STE, LCAGS GONG MES BSREGS PA’I DMAR ‘BAR BA LA REG KYANG MI ‘TSIG PA’I RIG SNGAGS DANG LDAN PA ZHIG GIS,

“Well then,” you might return, “how do we resolve the question?”  To start with, let’s consider a certain metaphor.  Let’s say that we have thrust a length of high-quality steel into the fire, and it has turned red-hot.  Then along comes a person who has mastered the secret spell that allows a person to grasp the steel without being burned.


[2332]
LCAGS GONG DE LAG TU BLANGS PA NA LUS SHES KYIS LCAGS DE’I REG BYA ‘DZIN KYANG, DE LA REG BYA DE SHIN TU TSA ZHING SREG PA’I RNAM PA CAN DU MI SKYE BA NI, RIGS SNGAGS BZLAS PA’I CHUS LAG PA BKRUS PA SOGS KYI RKYEN GYIS YIN NO,,

When they take the piece of steel up into their hand, their tactile consciousness is aware of the tactile sensation of the metal.  But this sensation does not arise in the aspect of being hot and burning; and this is something that occurs due to the factor of the person having, for example, dipped their hand in water over which they have repeated the secret words.


[2333]
DE ‘DRA BA’I RIG SNGAGS ZLOS PA DANG BRAL BA LA NI, LCAGS GONG GI REG BYA DE SHIN TU TSA ZHING SREG PA’I RNAM PA CAN DU SKYE’O,,

For a person who is without the skill of repeating these kinds of secret words, the touch of the length of steel takes on an aspect of being hot and burning.


[2334]
DE LTAR NA MI SREG PA DANG SREG PA’I REG BYA GNYIS KA LCAGS GONG GCIG PU DE’I REG BYAR NI BYA DGOS LA, LUS SHES TSAD MA GNYIS GCIG GIS GRUB PA’I REG BYA CIG SHOS KYIS GRUB PA NI MIN PAS GNYIS KA TSAD MAR KHAS BLANGS KYANG TSAD MA GCIG GIS GRUB PA CIG SHOS KYIS ‘GOG PA MIN NO,,

As such, we would have to say that both tangible objects—not being burning, and being burning—must be tangible objects of the single length of steel.  And we can say that, of these two different accurate perceptions of the awareness of the tangible, one is confirming a tangible object which by the other is not confirmed; and that, as such, we would have to accept both as being accurate.  It is not though the case that the confirmation by one accurate perception would have to invalidate the other.


[2335]
DE BZHIN DU GZHI GANG DU CHU KLUNG ‘BAB PA’I GZHI DER CHU KLUNG DE’I CHA SHAS SHIG YI DVAGS RNAMS LA SNGON LAS KYI DBANG GIS RNAG KHRAG TU SKYES PA DANG, CHU KLUNG GI CHA SHAS GZHAN ZHIG MI LA SNGON LAS KYI DBANG [f. 170b] GIS RNAG KHRAG TU MI SNANG BA’I BTUNG BA DANG, KHRUS KYI CHUR SKYE BA NA

And so we can point to any particular location where a clear stream happens to be flowing.  One part of the stream—due to the previous karma of a particular craving spirit—arises as pus and blood.  Another part of the stream—due to the previous karma of a particular human being—arises as water to drink, or water in which to wash oneself.


[2336]
DE GNYIS KA CHU KLUNG GCIG GI CHA SHAS RE YIN PAS, YI DVAGS KYI MIG SHES TSAD MAS GRUB PA’I DON DANG, MI’I MIG SHES TSAD MAS GRUB PA’I DON GNYIS KYANG DNGOS PO SO SO BA YIN PAS DE GNYIS GCIG GIS GRUB PA’I DON DE NYID, CIG SHOS KYIS DE’I BZLOG PHYOGS SU GRUB PA GA LA YIN,

Each one of the two represents a section of a single stream of water; and we can also say that the object as confirmed by the accurate perception of the craving spirit’s visual consciousness, and the object as confirmed by the accurate perception of the human being’s visual consciousness—these two—are discrete entities in their own right.  How then could one ever assert that these two were such that the very object confirmed by one were the incompatible opposite of that confirmed by the other?


[2337]
DE BZHIN DU BSHES SPRINGS LAS,
,YI DVAGS RNAMS LA SOS KA’I DUS SU NI,
,ZLA BA’ANG TSA LA DGUN NI NYI MA’ANG GRANG,

The same point is made in A Letter to a Friend:

For craving spirits,
Even the light of the moon
Is hot, in the summer;

And even sunlight
In the winter feels cold.


[2338]
ZHES GSUNGS PA YANG YI DVAGS RNAMS LA SNGON LAS KYI DBANG GIS SOS KA ZLA ‘OD REG BYA SHIN TU TSA BA DANG, DGUN GYI TSE NYI ‘OD KYI REG BYA GRANG BAR SKYE YANG, ZLA NYI’I ‘OD KYI STENG NAS MI LA GRANG DRO’I RNAM PA CAN DU SKYE BA MI ‘GAL LA,

What this is saying is that the touch of moonlight in the summer feels—due to their previous karma—unbearably hot to craving spirits; while at the same time the touch of sunlight can arise as something cold for them, in the winter.  Nor is it any contradiction to say that a feeling of cold or of heat arises from the moonlight or sunlight, for a human.


[2339]
DE GNYIS NI TSAD MA GCIG GIS TSA BAR GZHAL BA’I REG BYA NYID, CIG SHOS KYIS GRANG BAR ‘JAL BA MIN ZHING, GNYIS KA’ANG ZLA NYI GCIG GI ‘OD KYI REG BYAR ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR, DNGOS PO GCIG CES KYANG GSUNGS PAS GZHUNG DON ZHIB TU MA DPYAD PAR GO BA RAGS PA RE SHAR BA NA DES TSIM PA’I THAG GCOD MA SNGA ZHIG

As for these two, it is not the case that the very same sensation is experienced by the one accurate perception as being hot; and by the other as being cold—although it is the case that we can say of both that they are a sensation relating to a single moon, or a single sun.  And because of that, we do see the phrase here, “a single entity.”  It would be best though if we did not make any premature decision to be satisfied with a rough understanding on this point, without digging deeper.



A summary of the denial

[2340]
,GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to the second part of our more specific denial of the explanation on these points by the Mind Only school: the summary of just such a denial.


	[2341]
[VI.71b]
,MDOR NA JI LTAR SHES BYA MED DE BZHIN,
,BLO YANG MED CES DON ‘DI SHES PAR GYIS,

	To summarize,
	There is nothing
	In the universe;

	Just so, there is
	No state of mind.

	This is the point
	We need to understand.


[2342]
SNGAR RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA RNAMS KYI DON MDOR BSDU NA SHES BYA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA JI LTA BA DE BZHIN DU SHES BYA’I RNAM PA CAN GYI BLO YANG RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS SKYES PA MED CES DON ‘DI SHES PAR GYIS SHING GCES GSUNGS PAS,

Suppose then we were to summarize the points that we have covered in detail so far.  The fact is that there is nothing in the universe which exists through some nature of its own.  Just so, there is no state of mind which takes on the aspect of these existing entities which could arise in & of itself.  This, the root text is telling us, is the point which we need to understand.


[2343]
SHES BYA DANG SHES PA LA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD MED KYI KHYAD PAR MED PAR STON PA YIN LA, SKRA SHAD MED NA DER SNANG BA’I SHES PA YANG MED CES PA DANG, SGYU MA LA RTA GLANG DU ZHEN PA’I [f. 171a] ZHEN YUL MED NA DER ‘DZIN PA’I SHES PA YANG MED CES SOGS NI, SLOB DPON ‘DI’I LUGS GTAN MIN NO,,

What this is indicating is that there is no difference between knowable things and the awareness which knows them, as far as existing through some nature of their own, or not.  And what this is saying is that—if there is no strand of hair—then neither is there any state of mind which is taking that strand as its aspect.  It is absolutely not the position of this master though to say that—if the object that one was thinking was there when we perceived a horse or cow in an illusion didn’t really exist—then the state of mind that was grasping to it didn’t exist either.


[2344]
‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PAR BSTOD PA LAS KYANG,
,MA SHES PAR NI SHES BYA MIN,
,DE MED RNAM PAR SHES MED PA,
,DE PHYIR SHES DANG SHES BYA DAG
,RANG BZHIN MED PAR KHYOD KYIS GSUNGS,
ZHES PA DANG,

As A Praise of the One Who Went Beyond the World says it,

	In the absence of knowing,
	There is nothing to know.

	And when that is missing,
	There can be no knowing.

	Thus it is that you stated
	That nothing possesses
	Any nature of its own.


[2345]
DE BZHIN DU,
,RNAM SHES SGYU MA DANG MTSUNGS PAR,
,NYI MA’I GNYEN GYIS GSUNGS PA YIN,
,DE YI DMIGS PA’ANG DE BZHIN TE,
,NGES PAR SGYU MA’I DNGOS DANG ‘DRA,
ZHES GSUNGS TE,

And along the same lines we see,

	The Cousin of the Sun proclaimed
	That consciousness was just the same
	As an illusion.

	And what this consciousness
	Focuses upon is just the same:

	It is, with certainty,
	Like an illusory object.


[2346]
SHES PA ‘DI ‘DRA ZHIG GIS SHES ZHES ‘JOG RGYU MED NA, SHES BYA YUL DU ‘JOG MI NUS SO, ,’DIS YUL ‘DI ‘DRA ZHIG SHES ZHES ‘JOG RGYU MED NA SHES PAR YANG ‘JOG MI NUS PAS, SHES BYA DE MED PAR RNAM PAR SHES PA YANG MED DO,,

What this is saying is that—it we cannot say that such-and-such a state of mind is doing the knowing, then we cannot say that such-and-such an existing entity is the object that it knows.  If we cannot say “It is this which is knowing such-and-such an object,” then we cannot establish that there has been any knowing itself.  And so as such, if there exists here nothing to be known, then neither can there exist here anything to do the knowing.


[2347]
SHES PA DANG SHES BYA LTOS ‘JOG YIN PA DE’I PHYIR, DE GNYIS KA RANG BZHIN MED PAR KHYOD KYIS BSTAN ZHES GSUNGS PAS, DE GNYIS LA BDEN GNYIS GANG DU YANG GCIG MED LA CIG SHOS YOD PA’I RNAM DBYE MED PA ‘PHAGS PA’I BZHED PA’O,,

And what these lines are saying is, “What you taught us is that—since things to be known and the states of mind to know them are established in mutual dependence—then neither one has any nature of its own.”  As such, the position that the Realized One takes is that there can never be any distinction between these two where you could say that one of the two realities did not exist, but that the other one did.


[2348]
BYANG CHUB SEMS ‘GREL LAS,
,SHES PAS SHES BYA RTOGS PA STE,
,SHES BYA MED PAR SHES PA MED,
CES GSUNGS PA YANG SNGAR DRANGS PA’I BSTOD PA DANG DON ‘DRA BAS DON SHES YOD MED MTSUNGS PA’I KHUNGS SO,,

The Commentary on the Wish for Enlightenment also says,

What the mind does
Is to perceive
Things known by the mind.

Wherever there is nothing
To know,
There can be no mind knowing.

These lines convey the same point as the words of praise just quoted; as such, both are reputable sources for the idea that objects and the states of mind which perceive them are—in this way—equivalent.



An attempted proof
of the dominated

[2349]
GNYIS PA LA BZHI, GZHAN DBANG GI SGRUB BYED RANG RIG DGAG PA, SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS BDEN PA GNYIS CHAR LAS NYAMS PAR BSTAN PA, DES NA KLU SGRUB KYI LUGS KHO NA’I RJES SU ‘BRANG BAR RIGS PA, GZHAN [f. 171b] DBANG DANG ‘JIG RTEN PA’I THA SNYAD ‘GOG PA GNYIS MI MTSUNGS PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

Here next is the second general part of this discussion: denying the accurate perception which is supposed to prove that dominated things exist through some nature of their own.  We proceed in four steps: a denial of apperception, which is used to establish dominated entities; a demonstration that the Mind Only system fails from the viewpoint of both of the realities; a description of how—therefore—it is appropriate to follow the system of Arya Nagarjuna, exclusively; and showing that denying dominated entities and denying the verbiage of the world are not equivalent.


[2350]
DANG PO LA BZHI, GZHAN DBANG GI SGRUB BYED DRIS NAS DE MI ‘THAD PAR BSTAN PA, DE ‘THAD PA’I GZHAN GYI LAN DGAG PA, RIGS PA GZHAN GYIS KYANG RANG RIG MI ‘THAD PAR BSTAN PA, GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MO GSHAM KYI BU DANG MTSUNGS PAR BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these steps has four parts of its own.  These are (1) a request for proof to substantiate the existence of dominated entities, and then a demonstration that the attempted proof is incorrect; (2) a denial of the response by others that the proof is indeed correct; (3) a demonstration that apperception is illogical even according to other proofs; and (4) establishing that dominated entities which existed through some nature of their own would be the equivalent of the child of a barren woman.


	[2351]
[VI.72]
Grāhyaṃ vinā grāhakatā viyuktaṃ
dvayena śūnyaṃ paratantra rūpam,
Yadyasti kenāsya paraiṣi sattām
agṛhyamāṇaṃ ca sad ityayuktam.

,GAL TE GZUNG MED ‘DZIN PA NYID BRAL ZHING,
,GNYIS KYIS STONG PA’I GZHAN DBANG DNGOS YOD NA,
,’DI YI YOD PA GANG GIS SHES PAR ‘GYUR,
,MA BZUNG BAR YANG YOD CES BYAR MI RUNG,

		Suppose that there exist
		No objects to be held,
		Devoid then of any
		Holding itself;

		And that there
		Could exist
		Dominated entities
		That were empty
		Of the two.

		How is it then
		That you can perceive
		The existence of these?

		It would be wrong
To say there did exist
Something there,
Even though it wasn’t held.


[2352]
DE LTAR PHYI ROL MED PAR RNAM SHES PA MI SRID PAR BSTAN NAS, DA NI PHYI ROL MED PAS KHYAD PAR DU MA BYAS PA’I GZHAN DBANG GI DNGOS PO TZAM ZHIG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DGAG PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

We have demonstrated, then, that a kind of consciousness which could have no outer objects would be impossible.  We will now give an explanation which is meant to deny that the simple form of entities which are dominated—meaning, when we do not distinguish these as not being outer objects—could exist through any nature of their own.


[2353]
GAL TE PHYI ROL GYI GZUNG BA MED PAS DE LAS DON GZHAN PA’I ‘DZIN PA NYID DANG BRAL ZHING, GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD PA GNYIS KYIS STONG PA’I GZHAN DBANG GI DNGOS PO YOD NA, GZHAN DBANG ‘DI YI YOD PA DE KHYOD KYI SHES PA GANG GIS SHES PAR ‘GYUR ZHES DRI BAR BYA’O,,

Let’s suppose that since there exist no outer objects to be held, they are then devoid of any holding itself which could exist as an entity other than them.  And let’s also say that there could exist dominated entities that were empty of involving subject states of mind—and the objects that they hold—where these two are substantially separate.   We need to ask you then how it is that you can perceive the existence of these dominated entities.


[2354]
DE LA SHES PA DE NYID KYIS SHES PA DE NYID ‘DZIN PAR NI MI ‘THAD DE, RANG LA RANG GI BYED PA ‘JUG PA ‘GAL PA’I PHYIR RO,,

On this point, it would be incorrect to say that this perception could perceive this same perception—since it would be a contradiction for something to engage in an action upon itself.


[2355]
‘DI LTAR RAL GRI’I SO DE NYID KYIS DE NYID MI GCOD LA, SOR MO’I RTZE MO DE NYID KYIS DE NYID LA MI REG CING, LEGS PAR BSLABS PA’I G-YER ZHING YANG ZOR CAN GYIS KYANG RANG GI PHRAG PA LA ZHON PAR MI NUS SHING, MES RANG GI BDAG NYID MI SREG LA, MIG GIS RANG GI BDAG NYID LA LTA BA MA YIN NO,,

The blade of a sword, for example, cannot cut itself; nor can the tip of a finger touch itself.  Not even the most supple and airy gymnast can ride on their own shoulders; fire cannot burn itself; and the eye is not something which can see itself.


[2356]
‘DIR SHES PA DE NYID KYIS SHES PA DE NYID ‘DZIN PA MI ‘THAD PAR BSHAD PA’I GZHAN GYI LUGS KHYAD PAR BA NI ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And so here we will explain the particular position of others which states that a particular state of mind could hold that same particular state of mind; and show how this is incorrect.


[2357]
SHES PA DE NI RANG LAS DON GZHAN PA’I SHES PAS [f. 172a] KYANG ‘DZIN PA MA YIN TE, SEMS TZAM PA RANG GI GRUB MTHA’ DANG ‘GAL BA’I PHYIR TE, GAL TE ‘BRAS BU’I GNAS GYUR MA THOB PA’I SKABS SU RNAM PAR RIG PA DON GZHAN CIG RNAM PAR RIG PA’I SNANG YUL YIN NA RNAM PAR RIG PA TZAM NYID DU SMRA BA NYAMS PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES SEMS TZAM GYI GZHUNG LAS ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is not by the way the case that this particular state of mind is being held by a state of mind which is different from it; for that would contradict the Mind Only’s own school of thought.  This is because we see, in the great books of the Mind Only themselves, sentiments like “You would lose your status as a person who is professing that things are awareness alone, if you were to say that, even before this entity had reached that point where it had become a result, one state of awareness could act as the object which that same state of awareness were taking as its aspect of focus.”


[2358]
DE’I PHYIR SEMS TZAM PA LTAR BYAS NA DE LTAR ‘DZIN PA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MED LA, SHES PAS MA BZUNG BAR YANG YOD CES BYA BAR MI RUNG NGO ZHES DBU MA PAS SMRAS PA NA, SEMS TZAM PA NA RE, GAL TE YANG SHES PA DON GZHAN GYIS MI ‘DZIN KYANG RANG RIG NI YOD DO,,

As such, if we were to follow the thinking of the Mind Only, this kind of holding could not in any way exist.  To this, the Middle Way then would say, “Well then, it would be wrong to say there did exist something there, even though it wasn’t held by the mind.”  And then the Mind Only in turn would reply that “Even in a case where such an object were not held by a state of mind as a separate object, still we could point to apperception.”


	[2359]
[VI.73]
Tenaiva tasyānubhavo na siddhaḥ
siddhaḥ smṛter uttara kālataś cet,
Asiddha siddhyartham asiddham etan
nirucyamānaṃ na hi sādhanāya.

[VI.73a]
,DE NYID KYIS DE MYONG BAR ‘GRUB MA YIN,

		This particular one
		Is not something
		That could establish these,
		By experiencing them.


[2360]
DE’I PHYIR RANG RIG KHO NAS GZHAN DBANG DE ‘DZIN PA’I PHYIR DE YOD DO ZHE NA,

Suppose then that you say, “Dominated entities do exist, because they are perceived, if only by apperception.”


[2361]
SHES PA DE NYID KYIS DE MYONG BAR GRUB PA MA YIN NO,,

But then we would say that this particular state of mind is not something that could establish these, by experiencing them.


[2362]
‘DIR SEMS TZAM PAS RANG RIG JI LTA BU ZHIG KHAS BLANGS PA’I PHYOGS SNGA MA’I KHUNGS CUNG ZAD BSHAD NA, RTOG GE ‘BAR BA LAS, SEMS TZAM PAS RNAM SHES NI GNYIS SU SNANG STE, RANG SNANG BA DANG YUL DU SNANG BA’O,,

Why don’t we pause here, and say something about the earlier sources for the Mind Only’s assertion of apperception: how they come to accept its existence.  We can start with the Blaze of Reasoning, which talks about how—

The Mind Only say that consciousness appears in two forms: one where it appears as itself, and another in which it appears as its object.


[2363]
YUL DU SNANG BA’I RNAM SHES NI PHYI ROL GYI YUL GYI RNAM PAR GYUR NAS, RANG SNANG BA’I RNAM SHES KYI YUL DU ‘GYUR RO ZHE NA, ZHES PA’I LAN DU, YUL DU SNANG LAS GZHAN GYUR PA’I, ,SEMS NYID JI ‘DRA BA ZHIG SNANG, ZHES

And then comes the question: “Is it that the consciousness which is taking the aspect of the object assumes this aspect of an outer object, and thus becomes the object of the consciousness which takes its aspect on?”  In reply, we have the lines—

How is it that
The mind itself,

As something other
Than what appears
As the object,

Makes its own appearance?


[2364]
YUL DU SNANG BA LAS GZHAN PA STE DE DANG BRAL BA’I RANG NYID DU SNANG BA NI MA MTHONG NGO, ZHES BSHAD PAS

What this is saying is, “We don’t see where the mind itself is making its appearance, independent from—other than—its appearance as the object.”


[2365]
SEMS TZAM PAS SHES PA KHA NANG LTA LA GNYIS SU SNANG BA THAMS CAD LOG PA DANG, DE ‘DRA BA’I SHES PA DE KHO RANG GIS KHO RANG RIG PA’I RANG RIG TU ‘DOD [f. 172b] LA, DE LTA NA’ANG SHES NGO DER RIG BYA DANG RIG BYED THA DAD PA’I SNANG BA MED PAR ‘DOD DO,,

Those of the Mind Only school believe that our awareness is focused inward, and that all appearance of a duality between subject & object can be stopped.  They also say that this type of awareness is apperception, where it knows itself by itself.  Even so though, according to them, there is no appearance of a separate known and knower here.


[2366]
BDEN GNYIS KYI RANG ‘GREL LAS KYANG RANG RIG ‘GOG PA NA, SHES PA NI GNYIS KYIS DBEN PA’I NGO BO RIG PAR ‘BYUNG BA YIN PA DANG, DE MED PAR SHES PAR ‘GYUR GYI DE LTA MA YIN NA MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS TE,

The autocommentary to Distinguishing Between the Two Realities puts it this way:

If we deny the idea of apperception, we can understand how awareness can know things with a nature of being devoid of this duality; and how that could not exist.  If it were not this way, then the situation would be illogical.


[2367]
SEMS TZAM PAS GZHAN DBANG GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS GZHAN GYI KUN BRTAGS KYIS STONG PAR BSGRUBS PA NA, SHES PA GZHAN DBANG NI GNYIS SNANG GIS DBEN PA’I NGO BO RIG PAR ‘BYUNG BA’I RANG RIG GRUB NA, DE NAS GZHI DE GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS GZHAN DU MED PA SHES KYI, DE LTAR SNGON DU GZHI DE RANG RIG GIS MA GRUB NA, DE GZHIR BZUNG NAS KUN BRTAGS KYIS STONG PA MI ‘GRUB BO ZHES BSHAD DE,

That is, suppose that those of the Mind Only are trying to prove that dominated entities are devoid of constructs, in the sense of an object held and a holding consciousness which could be materially different from one another.  If they can establish a state of apperception which can perceive that the nature of the dominated entity of awareness is to be devoid of any duality of object & subject, then we could understand that this base entity had no quality where objects & subjects were materially different.  And they would say that if we take this as the base we could never establish that it was empty of these constructs.


[2368]
KHYOD KYI LTAR NA GZHAN DBANG GI SGRUB BYED GNYIS SNANG DANG BRAL BA’I RANG RIG GIS GRUB DGOS PA LA, DE MI ‘GRUB CES BKAG GO

That is, this master is making his denial by saying that—according to you—the support for dominated entities would have to be established by an apperception which was free of all duality; whereas it is not so established.


[2369]
,DE’I PHYIR DE ‘DRA BA’I RANG RIG BKAG PAS RNAL ‘BYOR BA SO SO RANG RANG GIS DE KHO NA NYID RIG PA’I RANG RIG BKAG PA DANG, ‘JIG RTEN PAS NGAS NGA RANG RIG CES PA’I THA SNYAD KYI DON GYI RANG RIG BKAG ZER BA NI BLUN PO’I GTAM MO,,

Some have said that—as such—when we deny such a kind of apperception, we are denying the apperception that individual deep practitioners might use to perceive suchness; and that we are also denying apperception in the sense it is meant by people in the world, when they use it in the phrase “I know myself.”  Such positions are of course just foolish talk. 



A response on the dominated

[2370]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, GZHAN GYI LUGS BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our second part from above: a denial of the response by others that the proof of dominated entities is indeed correct.  Here we proceed in two steps—a statement of the position that others take, and then a denial of that position.  Here is the first.


[2371]
‘DIR KHA CIG GIS TE SEMS TZAM PAS MDO SDE PA’I PHYOGS KHAS BLANGS NAS RANG RIG BSGRUB PA’I PHYIR, JI LTAR ME NI SKYES PA NYID NA RANG DANG BUM PA LA SOGS PA DAG RIM GYIS GNYIS SU GSAL BA LA MI ‘JUG PAR CIG CAR GSAL BAR BYED LA,

On this point, some make the following assertion:

Those of the Mind Only accept the position of the Sutrists on this point, and give the following description to substantiate the existence of apperception.  Think of how—when a fire starts—it illuminates both itself and something like a vase at the same instant; it is not the case that it acts in stages, first illuminating itself and then only afterwards illuminating the vase or whatever it may be.


[2372]
BUM PA’O [f. 173a] ZHES BRJOD NA SGRA RANG LA DMIGS PA DANG, DE’I DON BUM PA LA DMIGS PA GNYIS SKYED PA DE BZHIN DU RNAM SHES KYANG SKYE BA NA SO SOR RIM GYIS GNYIS SU MI ‘JUG PAR RANG DANG YUL GNYIS KA CIG CAR RIG PAR BYED DO,,

When we say the word “vase,” two things are triggered: the term is focused both upon itself, and upon the vase which it refers to.  Consciousness works the same; it is not the case that—when it arises—it engages in two things one after the other.  Rather, it knows both itself and the object of perception at the very same moment.


[2373]
DE’I PHYIR RANG RIG PA NI YOD PA KHO NA’O,,

As such, we have to say that apperception most certainly does exist.


[2374]
GANG ZHIG RANG RIG MI ‘DOD PA DES KYANG NGES PAR RANG RIG KHAS BLANG DGOS TE, DE KHAS MI LEN NA SNGAR DON ‘DI MTHONG NGO ZHES DUS PHYIS YUL DRAN PA DANG, SNGAR NGAS MTHONG NGO SNYAM DU YUL GYI NYAMS SU MYONG BA YUL CAN DRAN PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

And if someone were to say that they could not accept the concept of apperception, we would reply that they most certainly should.  And that’s because—if we fail to accept it—then it would be impossible for us ever to recall, later, a particular object, saying “Oh yes, I saw that earlier on.”  That is, it would never happen that the subject state of mind recalled having experienced its object.


[2375]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, SNGAR NYAMS SU MA MYONG BA LA DRAN PA SKYE MI SRID PAS DRAN PA NI SNGAR GYI NYAMS SU MYONG BA’I YUL CAN YIN NA, KHYOD RANG RIG MI ‘DOD PA LTAR NA SNGAR GYI SNGO ‘DZIN LTA BU’I SHES PA YANG RANG DUS SU NYAMS SU MA MYONG BAS, PHYIS KYI DRAN PA YOD PAR MI ‘GRUB BO,,

And why is that?  It is impossible for us to have a memory of something that we have not experienced earlier on.  As such, memory is a subject state of mind which holds as its object a previous experience.  According to you all though—those of you who do not accept the concept of apperception—a previous perception such as having perceived a patch of blue could not have experienced this object within its own time, which means that you cannot say that there was a later memory.


[2376]
‘DIS NI SNGAR GYI SNGO ‘DZIN DE LA MYONG BA YOD PAR PHYIS DE DRAN PA’I RTAGS LAS SGRUB PA YIN TE, SNGAR GYI SNGO ‘DZIN LA RANG MYONG BA’I RANG RIG YOD DE ZHES SGRUB NA NI, GZHAN LA GRUB PA’I DPE MI SNYED PAS DE LTAR MI SGRUB BO,,

What this is saying is that the existence of an earlier experience with the perception of blue is proven from the logical reason that we have a memory of it later.  If we were to phrase it like “during that previous perception of blue, there was present an occurrence of apperception which experienced this perception, because…” one would be unable to find a common example that the other party accepted as valid; so this is not how this would be proven.


[2377]
SNGO ‘DZIN LA MYONG BA YOD PAR GRUB NA NI, DE’I MYONG BA LA RANG GIS DANG GZHAN GYIS MYONG BA GNYIS SU KHA TSON BCAD NAS DANG PO KHYOD LA MI RUNG LA, GNYIS PA RANG LUGS KYIS BKAG PA NA MYONG BA’I KHYAB BYED KHEGS PA NA, MYONG BA TZAM YANG MI ‘THAD PAR ‘GYUR RO 

If we are seeking to prove that there exists an experience of a perception of blue, then we can narrow the possibilities down to two: either this perception experiences itself, or something else experiences it.  According to you, the first would be incorrect.  But if the second were denied by our own system, then we would be denying the general entire category of the possibility of experience.  In this case then, any experience at all would become incorrect here.


[2378]
ZHES ‘GOG PA YIN TE, RANG RIG SGRUB PA’I RIGS PA DRAG SHOS YIN NO,,

The denial presented thus actually represents the very best attempt at a reasoning to establish the existence of apperception.


[2379]
SNGO ‘DZIN DE RANG LAS DON GZHAN PA’I SHES PAS KYANG MYONG BAR MI RIGS TE, DE RIGS NA GNOD PA [f. 173b] GNYIS LAS DANG PO THUG MED DU THAL BA NI,

If would moreover be illogical to say that this perception of blue was experienced by some kind of awareness which was a discrete object from it.  And that’s because—if it were said to be logical—then two problems would attain.  The first of these is the necessity that the situation would be an infinite regression, described as follows.


[2380]
SNGON PO YONGS SU GCOD PA’I SHES PA DE RANG GI MJUG THOGS SU ‘BYUNG BA’I SHES PA GZHAN GYIS YONGS SU GCOD NA, DE LA DE ‘JAL BYED KYI SHES PA DON GZHAN DGOS SAM MI DGOS,

We would start with a specific question.  Suppose you say that a state of mind which discerns the color blue is itself discerned by another state of mind which comes just after it.  According to you, would this second state of mind require another state of mind that took it under consideration, and was separate from it, or not?


[2381]
MI DGOS NA SHES PA SNGA MA LA YANG MI DGOS PAR ‘GYUR LA, DGOS NA DE LA YANG GZHAN DGOS PAS THUG PA MED PA’I SKYON DU ‘GYUR ZHING, THUG MED DU SONG NA NI SNGO ‘DZIN DANG PO LA MYONG BA MI GRUB PA’I SKYON YOD DO,,

If you say that this following state of mind were not required, then it wouldn’t be required either with the state of mind previous to it.  If it were required, then yet another state of mind would be required, and you’d have the problem that the process would become endless.  And if it did become endless, then you’d have the problem that there was nothing you could establish as experiencing the first perception of blue.


[2382]
GNYIS PA YUL GZHAN YONGS SU MI GCOD PAR THAL BA NI, SHES PA SNGA MA PHYI MAS GCOD NA NI GZUGS SGRA LA SOGS PA’I YUL GZHAN MI GCOD PA DANG, DE LA MI ‘PHO BAR ‘GYUR TE, RNAM PAR SHES PA’I RGYUN LUGS TE RGYU BA MTHA’ DAG SHES PA SNGA MA GZHAN DE’I YUL CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here’s that second problem, which is that it would have to be the case that there was no discernment of other objects.  If the previous state of mind were discerned by the later one, then things like visible form, and sound—other objects—would not be discerned.  There would be no moving over to them; since the flow of the consciousness—all of its motion—would be devoted to being the object state of mind for that other, earlier state of mind.


[2383]
DE NI KHYAB PA MA NGES PA MIN TE, SHES PA SNGA MA SNGA MA SHES PA PHYI MA PHYI MAS YONGS SU GCOD NA, SNGA MA DE GZUNG DON DU BYAS NAS PHYI MA DE SKYE DGOS LA, DE’I TSE NANG GI YAN LAG GI NYE BA’I GZUNG DON BOR NAS, RING BA’I PHYI ROL LA MI ‘JUG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And this is not something where the necessity would be uncertain.  If it were the case that each earlier perception were discerned by each later perception, then each later instance would have to arise by taking each earlier instance as the object it held to.  And in this circumstance the awareness would not drop a closer object of perception that was an inner component, and engage rather in an outer object that was further.


[2384]
GAL TE SNGO ‘DZIN GYI RNAM SHES SNGA MA GCOD PA’I SNGO ‘DZIN GYI RNAM SHES PHYI MA DANG SNGON PO GCOD PA’I SNGO ‘DZIN GYI RNAM SHES GNYIS DUS GCIG TU SKYE BAS, YUL GZHAN LA MI ‘PHO BA’I SKYON MED DO SNYAM NA,

Here one may have the following thought:

Let’s consider the later example of a consciousness which is holding to a patch of the color blue, and which discerns an earlier consciousness which is holding to blue.  It would be arising at the same time as another consciousness which is holding to blue and discerning the blue itself.  As such, there is no such problem where it could not move on to another object.


[2385]
DE LTAR NA MIG GI RNAM SHES RIGS MTHUN RDZAS THA DAD PA GNYIS DUS GCIG TU GANG ZAG GCIG GI RGYUD LA SKYE BAR ‘GYUR LA, DE ‘DOD NA SEMS CAN RNAMS RNAM PAR SHES PA’I RGYUD GCIG PA STE RE RE BA’O ZHES GSUNGS PA DANG ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If that were the case, then two different visual consciousnesses that were of the same type but substantially different from one another would arise within the mindstream of a single person at a single moment in time.  And if you agreed to that, then you would be contradicting statements that living beings are “of a single flow of consciousness; which is to say, a flow which is separate.”


[2386]
‘DIR [f. 174a] ‘GREL PA LAS RNAM PAR SHES PA AUD PA LA’I ‘DAB MA BRGYA ‘BIGS PA LTAR, RIM GYIS ‘BYUNG BA RNAMS CIG CAR DU ‘JUG PA LTA BUR MNGON PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LA

Now at this point the autocommentary notes how “The way that consciousness works is similar to the way in which an arrow strikes a stack of lotus petals; although in actuality the point is passing through the petals one by one, it appears as though they are all being penetrated at the same moment.”


[2387]
‘GREL BSHAD KYIS, GAR MKHAN GYI KHANG PAR ZHUGS PA NA GAR MKHAN GYI GDONG DANG GLU LA SOGS PA YUL LNGA CIG CAR DU ‘DZIN PA’I RNAM SHES LNGA CIG CAR DU SHES PA MI SKYE ZHES PA’I LAN DU,

And the Explanation describes how, when we enter the home of an actor, it’s not the case that there arises in our mind a perception of five different states of consciousness, all at the same moment—where we perceive, altogether, five different objects of the actor’s face; their song; and so on.


[2388]
YUL LNGA ‘DZIN PA’I RNAM SHES RNAMS RIM GYIS ‘BYUNG YANG ‘JUG PA MYUR BAS CIG CAR DU SKYE BAR MNGON PA YIN NO, ZHES ‘CHAD PA NI

And so you can give the explanation that the states of consciousness that hold to the five different sense objects here occur one after the other; but because it is happening so quickly, it appears to us as though they are all occurring simultaneously.


[2389]
SHIN TU MI RIGS TE, RANG RIG SGRUB PA’I MDO SDE PA DANG SEMS TZAM PAS NI SEMS CAN RNAMS NI RNAM PAR SHES PA’I RGYUD RE RE BA’O,

And yet this would be wrong in the extreme, for the Sutrists and members of the Mind Only who seek to prove the existence of apperception would say that living beings have flows of consciousness that are discrete from one another.


[2390]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON RNAM ‘GREL LAS,
,DE RNAMS RIGS MTHUN PA NYID LAS,
,NUS PA NGES PAR ‘GYUR BA YIN,

The point here is described in A Commentary on Accurate Perception with the lines,

The potential they possess
Is certain, from the fact that
They are of the same type.


[2391]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR RNAM SHES RIGS MTHUN CIG CAR DU GANG ZAG GCIG LA MI SKYE BA LA ‘DOD KYI, RIGS MI MTHUN GYI RNAM SHES CIG CAR DU MI SKYE BA LA ‘DOD PA GTAN MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What this is saying is that we assert that multiple states of consciousness of one particular type cannot arise within a single person; but this is not at all a denial that different types of consciousness can arise within a single person at the same time.


[2392]
BOD MANG POS ZA ‘OG LA LTA BA’I TSE DKAR DMAR SOGS ‘DZIN PA’I SHES PA DU MA CIG CAR SKYE BA MA YIN NAM ZHES PA’I LAN DU, SHES PA DE RNAMS RIM GYIS ‘BYUNG YANG CIG CAR DU SKYE BAR SNANG BA YIN NO ZHES ZER BAS NI,

Many thinkers in Tibet have given the following answer to the question, “But isn’t it the case that many states of consciousness holding to different colors of white & red and so forth, arise altogether at the same time when we look at a length of multicolored silk?”  They would make the claim that these states of awareness come up on after the other, but only appear to be happening at the same time.


[2393]
RNAM PAR SHES PA’I RGYUD RE RE BA’O ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON GTZO BO’I RNAM SHES RIGS MTHUN LA DGONGS PA YANG MA SHES SHING, MIG GI RNAM SHES GCIG GIS KHA DOG MI ‘DRA BA DU MA ‘DZIN PA [f. 174b] YANG MA SHES PAR, KHRA BO ‘DZIN PA’I MIG SHES KYANG MA RTOGS PAR SNANG NGO,,

Then they say this, it’s an indication that they fail to understand that statements about how consciousness represents a separate flow are meant to refer to the continuity of the single type, of primary consciousness.  The fact is that a single visual awareness does hold multiple, differing colors; but they fail to understand this—and it would further seem the case that they have not realized how this visual consciousness can perceive a checkered pattern.


[2394]
DES NA RNAM SHES RIGS MTHUN CIG CAR DU SKYE BAR BRTZAD PA’I LAN DU, DE RNAMS ‘JUG PA MYUR BAS RIM GYIS SKYE YANG CIG CAR DU SKYE BAR MNGON ZHES ‘CHAD DGOS PA ‘DRA BA ZHIG SNANG YANG

As such, it would appear that such people have to give the following response to the challenge of asking how it is that specific sustained flows of awareness can arise.  That is, they would have to make explanations like saying that the way these awarenesses engage is very quick, and so—even though they are arising one after the other—it appears as though they are coming up all together.


[2395]
RANG RIG SGRUB MKHAN DE GNYIS KYIS ‘JUG PA MYUR BA CIG CAR DU ‘KHRUL BA’I RGYU YIN PA YANG RNAM ‘GREL DU BKAG PAS NA, GZHUNG ‘DI DE GNYIS KYI LUGS SU ‘JOG DKA’ BAR SNANG STE

As for these two groups though who are trying to establish the existence of apperception, the fact is that the Commentary on Accurate Perception denies this idea about the speed of their engagement being the cause of mistaking these awarenesses as being simultaneous.  As such, it would seem that in the system of these two groups there is some difficulty in establishing the meaning of this classical source.


[2396]
PHAL CHER RGYA DPE MA DAG PA’I SKYON YIN NAM ‘ON KYANG BLO GROS DANG LDAN PA RNAMS KYIS DPYAD PAR BYA’O,,

It seems most likely to me that the difficulty here stems from problems with the original Sanskrit manuscripts being used; but all this is a point that those with sharper intelligence than my own should investigate further.


[2397]
DE’I PHYIR THUG PA MED PA’I DANG, YUL GZHAN MI GCOD PA’I SKYON SPANG BA’I PHYIR, GDON MI ZA BAR RANG RIG KHAS BLANG DGOS SO,,

And so to avoid those problems of things going into an endless progression; or of an inaibility to discern other objects, these thinkers must beyond any doubt accept the concept of apperception.


[2398]
DE’I PHYIR YUL DANG YUL CAN GNYIS KA DRAN PA PHYIS SKYES PA LAS, SNGAR SNGON PO MTHONG BA’I TSE YUL MYONG BA DANG YUL CAN MYONG BA YOD PAR DPOG PAR BYED DO,,

As such, we have to deduce the existence of both an experience of the object, and an experience of the subject, during an earlier incidence of seeing blue, when later on there has arisen a memory of both the object and the subject involved.


[2399]
DE LTAR RANG MYONG BA’I RANG RIG YOD NA YANG GZHAN DBANG YOD PAR RANG RIG DES ‘GRUB PAS, ‘DI NI YOD PAR GANG GIS SHES PAR ‘GYUR, ZHES DBU MA PAS DRIS PA LA LAN ‘DI NYE BAR BSTAN PA YIN NO, ZHES SMRA’O,,

And so what’s being said in this entire section is the following.  Thus—given that there exists a state of apperception which can experience itself—then this apperception can be used to establish the existence of dominated entities; and this is the reply which is presented in response to the question of those of the Middle Way school when they said, “What is it that allows you to say that this state of mind exists?”



Assumptions from recollection

[2400]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, GZHAN LUGS DGAG PA DNGOS, RANG LUGS LA RANG RIG MED KYANG DRAN PA SKYE BA’I TSUL, DE LTAR BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Now that we have stated the position that others take here, we can continue on to the second step here: our actual denial of that position.  We will cover this point in three sections: the denial of the others’ position itself; an explanation of how—according to our own system—a memory can still arise, even in the absence of apperception; and responding to attempted rebuttal of this explanation.  Here is the first of these.


	[2401]
[VI.73b]
,GAL TE PHYI DUS DRAN PA LAS ‘GRUB NA,
,MA GRUB BSGRUB PAR BYA PHYIR BRJOD PA YI,
,MA GRUB ‘DI NI SGRUB PAR BYED PA MIN,

		Suppose we were
		To establish it
		From recollection
		At a later time.

		They are
		Bringing it up
		In order to substantiate
		
		That which has not yet
		Been established.

		The fact that this
		Does not exist
		Is not something
		Which serves to establish it.


[2402]
GAL TE RDZAS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I DBANG DU BYAS NAS PHYIS KYI DUS KYI DRAN PA LAS, DRAN YUL GYI SHES PA SNGA MA RANG RIG PAR ‘GRUB NA, PHYIR RGOL LA RANG RIG MA GRUB PA BSGRUB PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU, BRJOD [f. 175a] PA YI DRAN PA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR MA GRUB PA ‘DI NI, RANG RIG SGRUB PAR BYED PA MIN TE, SGRA MI RTAG PAR SGRUB PA LA MIG GI GZUNG BYA BZHIN NO,,

Suppose then that—with reference to a substance which existed by definition—we were to establish the existence of a previous case of apperception, an awareness of the original object we are now remembering, from the presence of a recollection at a later time.  Here, the opponent in the debate is bringing up a state of recollection in order to substantiate the existence of an apperception which has not yet been established.  And yet the fact that this recollection does not exist through any nature of its own is not something which serves to establish the apperception here; it would be like saying that sound is a changing thing because it is an object which the eye perceives.


[2403]
‘ON TE ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KYI DBANG DU YIN NA NI, RANG RIG PA’I ‘BRAS BU’I DRAN PA MED DO,,

But if you are speaking from the point of view of the parlance of the world, we would say that recollection as a result of apperception doesn’t even exist.


[2404]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, GAL TE ‘DIR MI GRUB NA DU BA DE’I ‘BRAS BUR SHES PAR ‘GYUR BA BZHIN DU, RANG RIG GRUB NA DE LAS DRAN PA ‘BYUNG BA’I ‘BREL PA GRUB NA, DRAN PA LAS RANG RIG YOD PAR NGES PAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG NA, RANG RIG DE DA DUNG DU YANG PHYIR RGOL LA MA GRUB PAS, RANG RIG GI ‘BRAS BU RANG RIG MED PAR MI ‘BYUNG BA’I DRAN PA GA LA YOD,

And why is that?  If the point were not made here, then it would be the same as when we deduce the presence of something from its result, of smoke.  If establishing apperception allows us establish a connection to a recollection that occurs from it, then we could confirm the existence of apperception from recollection; but in that case apperception would stil not have been confirmed to the opponent.  And as such, how could we ever say that there was a recollection which were a result of apperception, and which could never occur without apperception?


[2405]
‘BREL PA MED PAR MI ‘GRUB PA’I DPE NI, CHU TZAM DANG ME TZAM MTHONG BA LAS NOR BU CHU SHEL DANG ME SHEL DPOG PA NI MA YIN TE, DE GNYIS MED PAR YANG CHAR LA SOGS PA DANG, GTZUB SHING GTZUB PA SOGS LAS CHU DANG ME DAG ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

What are some examples of a failure to occur without a connection?  We cannot for example deduce the presence of the precious stones water crystal or fire crystal from seeing only water, or only fire.  This is because water and fire can also occur in the absence of these minerals; for example, from rain or the like, or from “fire sticks” that are rubbed together to help start a fire.


[2406]
DE BZHIN DU ‘DIR YANG RANG RIG MED PAR DRAN PA JI LTAR ‘BYUNG BA NI ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

In the same way, here too we will be covering ways in which recollection can occur, even without apperception.


[2407]
DGAG PA ‘DI LA LAN DU DRAN PA DANG RANG RIG MED {%ME} DU BZHIN DU RGYU ‘BRAS SU BSGRUBS PA’I SGO NAS, DRAN PAS RANG RIG DPOG PA MIN GYI, SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR DRAN PAS SNGAR GYI SHES PA LA MYONG BA YOD PAR DPOG LA,

For a reply to this denial, we can say that when you try to use a proof based on recollection and apperception being cause and effect in the way that fire and smoke are, it’s not the case that we can deduce apperception from recollection; rather, as we explained before, recollection helps us deduce the fact that the mind had a previous experience.


[2408]
DE LA RANG GIS DANG GZHAN GYIS MYONG BA GNYIS SU BCAD NAS BKAG PA NA, RANG GIS RANG MYONG BA ‘GRUB BO ZHES SMRA MOD KYANG SHES PAS RIG PA LA MDO SDE PA DANG SEMS TZAM PAS BZHAG PA DE GNYIS SU KHA TSON MA CHOD PA’I PHYIR TE,

Suppose we were to attempt making the denial here by eliminating both the possibility that the mind was experienced by itself, and by something else.  Now you could say that the determination was made by the mind’s knowing itself, but in fact when the Sutrists and the Mind Only present how it is that awareness knows things, they would not make the division into those two possibilities.


[2409]
MAR MES RANG GIS [f. 175b] RANG GSAL BAR MI BYED KYANG, DE LA GSAL BA MI LDOG PA BZHIN DU, SHES PAS PHYOGS SNGA MAS ‘DOD PA LTAR DU RANG GIS RANG MYONG BAR MI BYED KYANG DE LA MYONG BA TZAM MI LDOG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now a butter lamp does not illuminate itself by itself; nonetheless, neither can we say that it prevents this illumination.  Similarly, it is not the case that awareness—as the other side here has presented it—acts to experience itself, by itself.  This fact though does not prevent us from saying that it does experience things.


[2410]
GAL TE MAR MES RANG GIS RANG GSAL BAR BYED DO ZHE NA,

And suppose that you say that a butter lamp does illuminate itself, by itself.


[2411]
DE LTA NA MUN PAS RANG GIS RANG SGRIB PAR ‘GYUR LA, DE ‘DOD NA MUN KHUNG DU BUM PA MI MTHONG BA BZHIN DU, MUN PA YANG MI MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

In that case then, darkness would also obscure itself, by itself.  And if you agree to that, then you’d have to say that in a dark room we would not be able to see the darkness; just as in that same place we are unable to see a vase that is standing there.


[2412]
DE LTAR YANG RTZA SHE LAS,
,MAR ME RANG DANG GZHAN GYI DNGOS,
,GAL TE SNANG BAR BYED GYUR NA,
,MUN PA’ANG RANG DANG GZHAN GYI DNGOS,
,SGRIB PAR ‘GYUR BAR THE TSOM MED,
CES GSUNGS PA LTAR RO,,

As Wisdom puts it,

Suppose that a butter lamp
Acted to illuminate
Both itself and other things.

Beyond any doubt then
Darkness would as well
Obscure both itself
And other things too.


	[2413]
[VI.74]
Kāmaṃ sva saṃvedana siddhir astu
smartuḥ smṛter naiva tathāpi yuktā,
Ajñāna santāna javat paratvād
dhetur viśeṣān api caiṣa hanyāt.

,RANG RIG PA NI GRUB LA RAG MOD KYI,
,DE LTA’ANG DRAN PA’I DRAN PA RIGS MIN TE,
,GZHAN PHYIR MA SHES RGYUD LA SKYES PA BZHIN,
,GTAN TSIGS ‘DIS NI KHYAD PAR DAG KYANG ‘JOMS,

	In the end, your proofs
	Are going to rely upon
	It knowing itself;

	But it is still
	Not logical
	For recollection
	To recall,

	Because they are
	Other than each other.

	It’s the same as
	What could have arisen
	In the mindstream of one
	Who has not known;

	That logical statement
	Would also obviate details.


[2414]
CI STE DE LTAR RNAM PAR DPYOD PA BTANG NAS KYANG, SHES PAS RANG GI BDAG NYID RIG PA DANG, YUL RIG PAR BYED PA NI GRUB LA RAG MOD KYI STE GRUB TU CHUG KYANG, DRAN PA’I SHES PAS YUL DANG YUL CAN DE DAG DRAN PA NI RIGS PA MIN TE, PHYIS KYI DRAN SHES DANG SNGAR GYI YUL MYONG GI SHES PA GNYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID DU KHYED KYIS KHAS BLANGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

You may undertake some different forms of examination, but in the end your proofs are going to rely upon the idea of a state of mind knowing itself—its own self—and also knowing the particular object.  But still it is not logical to say that the state of mind of recollection can recall both the subject and the object involved.  And this is simply because you have accepted the idea that both the later recollecting state of mind and the earlier awareness which perceived the object are objects that are other than each other and which exist through some nature of their own.


[2415]
‘DI LTAR BYAMS PA’I SHES PA’I RANG RIG PA DANG YUL MYONG BA NI, SNGAR NYAMS SU MA MYONG BAS NYER SBAS KYI SHES PAS DRAN PA MA YIN PA

For example we can take the apperception and the experience of the object that occur with the state of mind possessed by an individual named John.  These were not previously experienced by another individual by the name of Mary, and so cannot be something that her mind recollects.


[2416]
DE BZHIN DU, SNGAR MA SHES PA STE MA MYONG BA’I RGYUD LA SKYES PA BZHIN DU RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN YIN PA’I PHYIR NA, RANG GI RGYUD DU GTOGS PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA DUS PHYIS ‘BYUNG BAS KYANG SHES PA DANG DON DAG NYAMS SU MA MYONG BA’I PHYIR DRAN PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

The case here is the same as with what could have arisen in the mindstream of a person who has not known or had a certain experience.  Because this person constitutes an “other” who exists through their own nature, even if a state of awareness taken in by their mindstream were to occur later on, there would be no recollection here, since they had not undergone an experience of the state of mind and corresponding object.


[2417]
CI STE RGYUD GCIG TU GTOGS PA RNAMS LA RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU’I DNGOS [f. 176a] PO GNAS PA’I PHYIR DRAN PA YOD PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM DU SEMS NA, 

And suppose you think to yourself the following:

Those that are though included into a single mindstream exist as entities which are cause and effect; as such, recollection would then be there.


[2418]
DE YANG MI RIGS TE GANG GI PHYIR RANG MTSAN GYIS GZHAN YIN PA’I PHYIR ZHES GTAN TSIGS ‘DIS NI, RGYUD GCIG TU GTOGS PA DANG RGYU ‘BRAS LA SOGS PA’I KHYAD PAR DE DAG KYANG NYE BAR ‘JOMS PAR BYED DE, ‘DI NI SNGAR BYAMS PA NYER SBAS LA BRTEN ZHES PA’I SKABS SU RGYAS PAR BSHAD ZIN TO,,

And so let’s consider a logical statement which states that this is also illogical, since the “other” here is one that exists by definition.  That would also obviate details such as these things being included into a single stream of awareness, or there being a connection of cause & effect.  We have already covered this in detail, back where we spoke about things that were relative either to John or to Mary.



Recollection according to
the autocommentary

[2419]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, GZHUNG ‘DI NYID NAS BSHAD PA’I LUGS DANG, GZHUNG GZHAN NAS BSHAD PA’I LUGS SO, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our second section from before: an explanation of how—according to our own system—a recollection can still arise, even in the absence of apperception.  Here first we will give the presentation on this topic as it is made in the current text; and then review how it is made in other classical texts.  Here is the first.


	[2420]
[VI.75]
Yenānubhūto viṣayas tato’sya
smartuḥ paratvaṃ na hi me’sti yasmāt,
Tato mayā dṛṣṭam iti smṛtiḥ syād
eṣā ca loka vyavahāranītiḥ.

,GANG PHYIR GANG GIS YUL MYONG GYUR DE LAS,
,DRAN PA ‘DI GZHAN NGA LA YOD MIN PA,
,DE PHYIR NGA YIS MTHONG SNYAM DRAN ‘GYUR TE,
,’DI YANG ‘JIG RTEN THA SNYAD TSUL LUGS YIN,

		First of all, in ours
		That recollection of
		Of having undergone
		An experience

		Could never be
		Something other.

		For this reason,
		It will happen
		That there will be
		A recollection

		Where we say to ourselves,
		“I have seen this.”

This too is the way
Of the world;
The way that the world
Speaks of things.


[2421]
GAL TE RANG RIG MI ‘DOD PA KHYOD KYI LTAR NA DRAN PA SKYE LUGS JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

Suppose now that one were to come with the following question: “Well, if you refuse to accept the idea of apperception, then just how is it—according to your view—that we can have a recollection of something?”


[2422]
GANG GI PHYIR SNGAR GYI SHES PA GANG GIS YUL MYONG BAR GYUR PA’I SHES PA DE LAS DRAN PA’I SHES PA ‘DI RANG MTSAN GYIS GZHAN DU GYUR PA NGA’I LUGS LA JI LTAR YOD PA MIN PA DE LTAR NI BSHAD ZIN LA,

First of all, we have already explained how, in our system, that state of mind or recollection which comes from a state of mind—a previous state of mind—which underwent an experience of a particular object could never be something that existed as something “other” which existed by definition.


[2423]
SA MYUG LTA BU’I NYER LEN GYI RGYU ‘BRAS LA RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN DU ‘DZIN PA, ‘JIG RTEN GYI BLO RANG DGA’ BA LA MED PA YANG SNGAR BSHAD ZIN PAS SNGAR GYI YUL MYONG DANG PHYIS KYI DRAN PA’I RGYU ‘BRAS LA YANG, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I BLO LHAN SKYES LA RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN DU ‘DZIN PA MED DO,,

There is not even any normal state of mind of a person in the everyday world which—with regard to cause & effect in the sense of a material cause such as a seed for a plant producing a sprout—would hold to the idea that these things were other than each other, by definition.  Further, as we have already explained, there is no tendency for the natural state of mind of people in the world to hold to things as being other than each other by definition, in the case of the cause & effect represented by the earlier experience of an object and a later recollection.


[2424]
DE MED PA TZAM DU MA ZAD SNGAR SNGO ‘DZIN GYIS MTHONG BA’I YUL PHYIS DRAN PA NA ‘DI NGAS SNGAR YANG MTHONG NGO ZHES THA SNYAD BYED DO,,

Not only is there no such thing, but people further apply a certain terminology to this type of thing, saying “I saw that before” when referring to an object seen by a perception of blue earlier, and then remembering that object later on.


[2425]
DE’I PHYIR MYONG DRAN GNYIS DANG DE’I DUS KYI YUL GNYIS RANG MTSAN GYIS THA SNYAD DU ‘DZIN PA ‘JIG RTEN PA RANG DGA’ BA LA MED PAR GSAL TE, DE LTA MA YIN NA RGYUD [f. 176b] GZHAN GYI MYONG BA LA YANG RANG GI DRAN PA SKYE BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As such, it is clear that it simply does not happen with normal people of the world that they consider both an original experience and a later recollection of it—along with the objects involved in each case—and think of them as existing nominally, by definition.  If this were not the way it is, then we ourselves could suddenly undergo a recollection of something that had been experienced by someone else.


[2426]
DE’I PHYIR SNGAR YUL NYAMS MYONG GI SHES PAS MYONG BA DANG BCAD PA DE, PHYIS DE DRAN PA’I SHES PAS MA MYONG BA DANG MA BCAD PA MIN PAS, ‘DI SNGAR YANG NGA YIS MTHONG SNYAM DU DRAN PA SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE,

For this reason, it is not the case that a state of mind which has undergone the experience of a certain object previously has this experience, and makes this discernment; and then when a later recollection of this occurs, it cannot experience or discern that.  As such, it will happen here that there will come to arise a recollection where we say to ourselves, “I have seen this thing before as well.”


[2427]
‘DI YANG ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KYI TSUL GYI LUGS YIN GYI, THA SNYAD BTAGS PA TZAM GYIS MA TSIM PAR BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I TSUL GYIS DPYAD NAS ‘JOG PAR NI MI BYA STE, BTAGS DON BTZAL NA MI RNYED BA’I BRDZUN BA’I DON CAN NYID KYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This too is the way of the world; the way that the world speaks of things.  It is not, rather, the case that those of the world refuse to be satisfied with the way in which things are simply referred to with terms, and then feel that they need to engage in some close examination accomplished by seeking out just what it is that the terms refer to.  And that’s because the very meaning—in the parlance of the world—of falsity is where you seek out what something refers to and find that it is missing.


[2428]
RANG ‘GREL LAS RDZAS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I RANG RIG DANG DRAN PA BKAG PA’I ‘OG TU, ‘ON TE ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KYI DBANG DU YIN NA NI, DE LTA NA YANG RANG RIG PA’I RGYU CAN GYI DRAN PA MI SRID PA NYID DO,

Subsequent to denying both apperception and recollection that could exist substantially—by definition—the autocommentary states, “But even if you were to restrict yourself to the terminology of the everyday world, still a recollection that had, as its cause, apperception would be completely impossible.”


[2429]
ZHES DON DAM DU MA ZAD THA SNYAD DU YANG RANG RIG BKAG LA, RANG RIG PA MED PAR DRAN PA JI LTAR ‘BYUNG BA DE LTAR STON PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES RANG RIG MED KYANG MYONG BA LAS DRAN PA SKYE TSUL SKABS ‘DIR STON PAR GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that apperception is denied not only in an ultimate sense, but in a nominal sense as well: “We will demonstrate thus how recollection occurs even without apperception.”  That is, they are saying that here in this section of the text, it will be explained how—even without apperception—we can have a recollection of an experience.


[2430]
DE LA NGAS MTHONG SNYAM DU DRAN PA NI YUL CAN DRAN PA DANG, SNGON PO LA SOGS PA ‘DI MTHONG SNYAM DU DRAN PA NI YUL DRAN PA’O,,

And so when we have a recollection where we say “I was seeing,” we are having a recollection of the subject in the perception; and when we think to ourselves “I saw a patch of blue” or whatever it may be, and have this recollection, it is a recollection of the object in the perception.


[2431]
DE YANG SNGAR NGA RANG GIS MTHONG BA DE NYID NGA RANG GIS DRAN SNYAM PA NI DRAN TSUL KHYAD PAR BA YIN LA, DRAN PA LA DE BYUNG NA SNGAR BYAMS PA LTA BU MTHONG BA’I YUL CAN SHES PA DE KHO RANG GIS KHO RANG MYONG BAR GSAL TE, DRAN PA NI MYONG BA JI LTA BA’I RJES SU BYED PA’I PHYIR RO SNYAM DU BSAMS SO,,

And when we say to ourselves, “I saw this previously, I remember that very thing,” this is a particular detail of recollection.  When this kind of thing happens in a recollection, we can say that it is becoming clear to someone like John that they must had a subject state of mind that was holding some object that they saw, and that they had some experience of themselves here.  That is, we always think to ourselves that a recollection is something that followed upon a certain original experience.


[2432]
RANG LUGS NI ‘JIG RTEN NA [f. 177a] SNANG BA’I DRAN TSUL DE KHAS LEN KYANG, DRAN TSUL DE LTAR ‘ONG BA DE SNGAR GYI YUL MYONG BA’I SHES PA DE KHO RANG GIS KHO RANG RIG PA’I DBANG GIS BYUNG BA MIN GYI, SNGAR GYI MYONG BAS BCAD PA DE NYID DRAN PAS KYANG GCOD PA’I YUL GCIG PA’I DBANG GIS BYAMS BA ‘DI SNGAR YANG NGAS MTHONG ZHES DRAN PA SKYE’O,,

Our own position says first of all that we do accept this description of how recollection occurs to us, as it is described in the everyday world.  Nonetheless, what we say is that for a recollection to occur in the way it’s described here, it is not something that could have occurred through the power of some kind of apperception, where the previous experience of the object somehow knew itself by itself.  Rather, what happens is that there has been the discernment of an object by a previous experience, and then we recollect that; and so it is due to the single object discerned that there can arise in John a recollection where he says to himself, “I saw this previously as well.”


[2433]
DES NA NGA RANG GIS MTHONG BA NGA RANG GIS DRAN ZHES PA LTA BU’I THA SNYAD NI RANG GIS KYANG KHAS LEN LA, DE KHAS BLANGS KYANG BKAG PA’I RANG RIG DANG MI ‘DRA BA YANG ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

As such, we can say that we also accept the kind of expression where we say to ourselves, “I myself recall what I myself saw”; but even accepting that, we need to realize that what we depend upon for this to happen is something other than the apperception which we have denied.


[2434]
GZHAN GYI LUGS KYIS MYONG DRAN DANG DE’I DUS KYI YUL GNYIS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN DU ‘JOG PAS, MYONG DRAN GNYIS YUL GCIG PA DANG DE GNYIS RGYUD GCIG TU ‘DOD MOS KYANG DER ‘JOG MI NUS PA NI SNGAR MANG DU BSHAD ZIN TO,,

The other party in the debate here posits things which are other than each other which also exist be definition, with both the original experience and the recollection; as well as with the two objects of each of these, in their own time.  And admittedly one may assert that the two of the experience and the recollection share the same object; and that the pair constitute part of a single stream of awareness; but we have gone in to some great detail already to show how one might fail to establish this.


[2435]
BYAMS PA ‘DI ZHES ZER YANG DE SKAD SMRA DUS KYI DUS DANG, DE’I DUS SU GANG NA GNAS PA’I YUL GYIS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I BYAMS PA SNGAR MTHONG SNYAM DU MI ‘DZIN PAR, BYAMS PA TZAM LA ‘DZIN PA NI RANG GI BLO LA BLTAS PAS SHES SO,,

We can say the name “John” without specifically holding to John in terms of a specific point in time—the time when we are speaking of him, or a distinction of a certain time in which the the object involved is existing, when we think of John that we saw earlier on.  Rather, we can just be considering John in general, as any of us knows by observing how our own thoughts work.



Recollection according to
other classics

[2436]
GNYIS PA NI,

With this we have reached our second step from above: a review of how recollection can still arise, even without apperception, as this presentation is made in classical texts other than the autocommentary.


[2437]
RANG RIG MED PAR DRAN PA SKYE TSUL GYI LUGS CHEN PO GNYIS YOD PA’I DPAL LDAN ZHI BA LHA’I LUGS NI, SPYOD ‘JUG LAS, GAL TE RANG RIG YOD MIN NA, ,RNAM SHES DRAN PAR JI LTAR ‘GYUR, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR RO,,

Now there are two great classical presentations of how recollection can arise, even in the absence of apperception.  We can point first to the system of the glorious Shantideva, which is broached as follows in A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life:

How can we recollect
A state of mind,

In the case that there exists
No apperception?


[2438]
‘DI’I PHYOGS SNGA MA’I LUGS NI SNGAR RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA NYID YIN NO,,

The position here of the other party is something that we have most certainly covered already, in some detail.


[2439]
PHYOGS SNGA MA’I THAL BA DANG BZLOG PA GNYIS KA LA’ANG KHYAB PA MED PA’I LAN ‘DEBS [f. 177b] PAS, RANG RIG MED KYANG DRAN PA SKYE TSUL JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

And so one may question us here, saying—

You have answered “that is not necessarily the case” to both the statement of necessity of the other party here, and to the position it implies.  How then, according to you, is it that a recollection can arise even in the absence of apperception?


[2440]
‘DZIN PA’I SHES PA LAS GZHAN GZUNG BYA’I DNGOS PO YUL DU GYUR PA BLOS MYONG BA NA, YUL MYONG BA’I SHES PA LAS RNAM SHES YUL CAN DRAN PA ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

When the mind experiences that which serves as the object—the entity which is perceived, as distinct from the perceiving awareness—we recollect the subject state of mind from the state of mind that experienced the object.


[2441]
GAL TE YUL GZHAN MYONG BA LAS YUL CAN DRAN PA SKYE BA NI RIGS PA MA YIN TE, HA CANG THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

And suppose to this someone were to reply—

But saying that a recollection of a subject state of mind were to arise from the experience of some other object doesn’t seem logical; it would be excessive to think that.


[2442]
NYES PA MED DE YUL MYONG BA LAS YUL CAN DRAN PA SKYE BA NA, SHES PA SPANGS NAS DRAN PA MIN GYI, SNGAR GZUGS ‘DI MTHONG NGO ZHES YUL YUL CAN GNYIS ‘BREL BA LAS TE ‘BREL BAR DRAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And yet there’s no problem here.  When a recollection arises of a subject state of mind, from an experience of the object involved, it’s not as if the recollection occurs by releasing the state of mind.  What happens is that our recollection occurs through a relationship: when you say, “Earlier on, I saw this particular visible object,” it happens through a connection between the object and the subject state of mind.


[2443]
DPER NA DGUN GYI DUS SU BYI BAS LUS LA RMUGS PA NA, BYI DUG ZHUGS YOD KYANG RMUGS PA MYONG GI DUG MA MYONG NGO,,

Suppose, for example, a rat bites the body of a hibernating bear, during the wintertime—and some poison enters the bloodstream from the bite.  This animal might experience the bite, but they may not experience the poison.


[2444]
DE LAS DUS PHYIS ‘BRUG GI SGRA THOS PA NA RMUGS PA’I TSE DUG ZHUGS PAR ‘DUG SNYAM DU DRAN KYANG, SNGAR GYI TSE DUG MA MYONG BA BZHIN NO,,

Some time later on, the bear hears the sound of thunder and awakens, and may have a memory in which they think to themselves, “That poison must have entered by body while I was hibernating.”  But they do not experience the poison of the previous time.


[2445]
DE LA BYI BAS RMUGS PA NI SNGO ‘DZIN GYIS YUL MYONG BA BZHIN NO,,

Being bitten by the rat is analogous to the experience of its object, by the perception of a patch of blue.


[2446]
RMUGS PA DANG DUS GCIG TU DUG ZHUGS PA NI YUL BZUNG BA DANG DUS GCIG TU YOD PA’I YUL CAN GYI MYONG BA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

The infection of the body by the poison which occurred simultaneous to the original bite is analogous to the experience of the subject state of mind that existed at the same time as when the object was perceived.


[2447]
DE’I TSE YUL CAN RANG GIS RANG MA MYONG BA NI, RMUGS PA’I TSE DUG MA MYONG BA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

The fact that—at that time—the subject state of mind did not experience itself by itself is analogous to the way in which the poison was not experienced, at the time of the bite.


[2448]
PHYIS RMUGS PA DRAN PA NI YUL MYONG BA DRAN PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

Recollecting the bite later on is analogous to recollecting the original object.


[2449]
YUL MYONG DRAN PA NYID KYIS SNGAR GYI YUL CAN KHO RANG GIS KHO RANG MA MYONG YANG DRAN PA NI, RMUGS PA DRAN PA NYID KYI MTHUS SNGAR ZHUGS PA’I DUG MA MYONG BA DRAN PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

And so a recollection occurs through the recollection of the experience of the object, even though the previous subject state of mind did not experience itself by itself.  This is analogous to the way in which—due to the single recollection of the hibernation—one recalls what was not experienced when the poison entered the body earlier on.


[2450]
‘DI NI RANG RIG MED PAR DRAN PA SKYE BA’I RIGS PA MKHAS PA’I DBANG POS MDZAD PA PHUL DU BYUNG BA ZHIG SNANG STE, SPYOD ‘JUG GI [f. 178a] BSHAD PA BYED PA RNAMS KYIS JI BZHIN DU MTHON PA ‘DRA’O,,

This reasoning for how recollection occurs even without apperception would appear to be one of the greatest achievements of this lord of all masters; and it seems to me that the commentators on A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life have drawn out this point quite properly.


[2451]
‘DI NI SPYIR PHYIS KYI RNAM SHES KYI DRAN PA MI ‘THAD PAR THAL, SNGAR GYI RNAM SHES DES RANG GIS RANG MA MYONG BA’I PHYIR, ZHES PA LA KHYAB MA GRUB KYI LAN BTAB PA YIN PAS, SPYOD ‘JUG GI DGONGS PA NI THA SNYAD DU RANG RIG ‘GOG PA MIN ZHES PA NI RGYAL SRAS CHEN PO’I BZHED PA GTAN MIN NO,,

Generally speaking, this reasoning is a reply of “that’s not necessarily the case” to the argument that it must be incorrect to say that we have a later recollection of a state of mind, since earlier on this state of mind did not experience itself by itself.  As such, it is not at all the position of his great child of the Victors to say that it was not the intent of The Guide to deny apperception, in a nominal sense.



Rejecting rebuttal about
direct accurate perception

[2452]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, MNGON SUM GYI TSAD MA GZHAN DANG RJES DPAG LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA DANG, YID SHES GZHAN GYI RTZOD SPANG NGO, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our third section from before, which is responding to attempted rebuttal of our explanation of how a memory can still arise, even in the absence of apperception.  Here we proceed in two steps: rejecting rebuttal about another direct, accurate perception, and then the same for a deductive form of the same; followed by rejecting rebuttal concerning another consciousness of the thoughts.


[2453]
‘O NA RANG LUGS LA SNGO ‘DZIN SOGS KYI SHES PA THAMS CAD YOD PAR ‘DOD DGOS LA DE LTA NA, ‘DI YI YOD PA GANG GIS SHES PAR ‘GYUR, ,MA GZUNG BAR YANG YOD CES BYAR MI RUNG, ZHES GZHAN LA SMRAS PA LTAR RANG LA YANG SKYON DU ‘GYUR TE, SNGO ‘DZIN DE RANG GIS YOD PAR SHES NA RANG RIG KHAS BLANG DGOS LA, SHES PA DON GZHAN GYIS RIG PA YANG MI ‘THAD PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

One may come then with the following objection—

Well now, even in your own system, you would have to agree that all of these states of mind do actually exist—the perception of a patch of blue, and so on.  And the same criticism that you have leveled at others applies to you yourselves as well: “How do you know that this kind of perception exists?  You can’t just say that there are also things here that cannot be perceived.”  That is, if you respond that the perception of the blue itself perceives that it itself exists, then you would have to accept the idea of apperception.  And it would be incorrect to say that it was perceived by a perception that was something different.


[2454]
‘DI NI SHIN TU DKA’ BA’I GNAS SU ‘DUG PAS BSHAD PAR BYA STE, DE NI YUL DANG YUL CAN DRAN TSUL DPER BLANGS TE BSHAD NA RTOGS SLA’O,,

Given that this is such an extremely difficult point, let’s cover it here.  It can be easily understood if we use a metaphor to explain how we can recollect both an object and its subject.


[2455]
DE LA YUL DRAN PA NYID KYIS YUL CAN YANG DRAN PAS, YUL CAN DRAN PA ZUR PA MI DGOS PA BZHIN DU SNGO ‘DZIN LTA BU’I YUL SNGON PO GRUB PA NYID KYIS SNGON PO ‘JAL BYED ‘GRUB KYI, SNGON PO ‘GRUB TSUL LAS GZHAN PA’I SNGON PO ‘JAL BYED ‘GRUB TSUL MI DGOS SO,,

Here we can start by saying that the recollection of an object itself also recalls the original subject state of mind.  As such, there is no need for a different, additional recollection of that subject.  That is, the very establishment of the object—the patch of blue, say, for a perception of blue—establishes the state of mind which took the blue under consideration.  It is not though as if we would require some way of establishing the state of mind which took the blue under consideration which were different from the way we were establishing the blue itself.


[2456]
DE YANG SNGON POS SNGO ‘DZIN LA RANG ‘DRA’I RNAM PA GTAD PA SHAR BA NYID KYIS, SNGON PO ‘GRUB PA NI LUGS GZHAN DANG YANG ‘DRA’O,,

That is, when the blue directs the particular aspect that reflects it towards the perception of the blue, the very manifestation of this perception is sufficient to establish the existence of that blue—this much is similar in other schools of thought as well. 


[2457]
‘ON KYANG MI ‘DRA [f. 178b] BA NI SNGO ‘DZIN DE ‘GRUB PA NA GNYIS SNANG DANG BRAL BA’I ‘DZIN RNAM YAN GAR BA MYONG BA’I RANG RIG GI SGO NAS ‘GRUB PA YIN LA, DE YANG SHES PA THAMS CAD LA ‘DRA BAR LUGS GZHAN DAG ‘DOD LA,

A point on which the presentations diverge here though is where certain other systems would say that—when they establish the existence of the perception of the blue—they must do so by pointing to an apperception which experiences a discrete aspect of perceiving which is devoid of all duality between subject & object.  And they would say that this is the same for all other states of mind.


[2458]
‘DIR NI DBU MA SNYING PO DANG BDEN GNYIS RTZA ‘GREL LAS GSUNGS PA BZHIN DU DE ‘DRA BA’I ‘DZIN RNAM YAN GAR BA MI SRID PAR BZHED PAS, DE MYONG BA’I RANG RIG GIS MI ‘GRUB KYI, SNGON PO GRUB PA NYID KYIS SNGO ‘DZIN DE ‘GRUB STE,

On this, we would ourselves take the same position here as that expressed in Heart of the Middle Way and both the root text and commentary to the Two Realities—which say that it is impossible for there to be any such discrete aspect of perceiving.  As such, we cannot say that there is established any state of apperception which would further establish the subject here; rather, it is simply establishing that the blue itself is present, which establishes the presence of the perception of this blue.


[2459]
DPER NA YUL DRAN PA NYID KYIS YUL CAN DRAN PA YIN GYI, SNGAR YUL CAN KHO RANG GIS KHO RANG GZHAN DAG ‘DOD PA LTAR MYONG BA’I DBANG GIS DRAN PA DE ‘BYUNG BA MIN PA DANG ‘DRA’O,,

For example, the recollection of a particular object is what allows the recollection of the particular subject state of mind involved; the case here is similar to where it is not, as others would have it, that the previous subject state of mind experiences itself by itself, and then this allows the recollection to occur.


[2460]
DE LTAR BYA DGOS PA YANG TSIG GSAL LAS, TSAD MA’I GRANGS ‘JUG PA GZHAL BYA’I GZHAN GYI DBANG YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, GZHAL BYA’I RNAM PA’I RJES SU BYED PA TZAM GYIS RANG GI NGO BO YOD PAR RNYED PA’I TSAD MA DAG GI RANG GI NGO BO RNAM PAR ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR, ZHES GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

The fact that we have to proceed in this manner is clearly expressed as well in A Clarification of the Verses:

The number of accurate perceptions we recognize is determined by a different factor: that is, the number of objects that these perceptions can take under consideration.  And it is only in correspondence with the aspects of objects under consideration that the essential nature of the pair of accurate perceptions which can recognize the existence of the natures of each of these is itself established.


[2461]
DE DAG GI DON NI TSAD MA GNYIS SU NGES PA GZHAL BYA GNYIS SU NGES PA’I DBANG GIS ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR DANG, TSAD MA LA GZHAL BYA’I RNAM PA SHAR BA’I DBANG GIS ‘JAL BYED KYI TSAD MA’I RANG GI NGO BO YOD PAR ‘JOG LA,

The point of these lines is to say that the fact that the number of accurate perceptions is fixed at two is due to the fact that the objects they take under consideration are also fixed at two.  And accurate perceptions as acting to take things under consideration are further fixed as existing with a nature of such perceptions by force of the aspects that make their appearance with them, as they do take objects under consideration.


[2462]
TZAM GYIS ZHES PA NI SEMS TZAM PA DANG MDO SDE PA ‘DOD PA LTAR TSAD MA GZHAL BYA JI ‘DRA PA DE ‘DRA BA’I RNAM PA’I RJE SU BYED PAS GZHAL BYA ‘GRUB LA,

When they utilize the word “only” in the citation above, what they’re saying is that—according to the beliefs of those who belong to the school of Only Mind, and the Sutrists—the aspect that accurate perceptions take on always follows from the objects they take under consideration, and this then leads to the confirmation of these objects.


[2463]
DE NAS TSAD MA ‘GRUB TSUL NI SNGA MA LAS ZUR DU TSAD MA RANG GI NGO BO LA GNYIS SNANG DANG BRAL BA’I ‘DZIN RNAM YAN [f. 179a] GAR BA MYONG BA’I RANG RIG GIS ‘GRUB PA ‘GOG STE, GZHAL BYA ‘GRUB PA TZAM GYIS ‘GRUB PA’I DON NO,,

And so then we can say that this way in which accurate perception is established acts in turn to deny the idea that things could be established by an apperception which undergoes a discrete experience in an aspect of being the perceiver, free of all subject-object duality in its nature—an accurate perception which has a separate experience from the one that came before.


[2464]
‘DI NI ‘PHAGS PA NYID KYIS,
,GAL TE RANG LAS TSAD MA GRUB,
,GZHAL BYA RNAMS LA MA LTOS PAR,
,KHYOD KYI TSAD MA GRUB GYUR ‘DIR,
,GZHAN LA MI LTOS RAB GRUB ‘GYUR,
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS PA YIN TE,

This is in fact what he had in mind when The Arya himself stated,

Suppose this state of mind
Were established
As an accurate perception
All on its own,

Without depending
Upon the objects
It takes under consideration.

When you then
Are establishing
What it is that makes
A thing an accurate
Form of perception,

Your proof itself
Is perfectly free
Of relying on
Anything else at all.


[2465]
TSAD MA ‘GRUB PA LA GZHAL BYA GRUB PA TZAM GYIS MI CHOG PAR TSAD MA RANG LAS TSAD MA ‘GRUB PA GZHAN DAG ‘DOD PA LTAR YIN NA, GZHAL BYA LA MA LTOS PAR TSAD MA ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Suppose it were as others would have it: suppose that—in order to establish an accurate perception—we could not simply be satisfied by establishing what that perception takes under its consideration.  Suppose, as others would have it, that accurate perception is established through accurate perception itself.  In that case, something would be established as an accurate perception without relying upon that thing which it takes under consideration.


[2466]
DE ‘DOD NA DNGOS PO RNAMS RGYU RKYEN GZHAN LA MA LTOS PAR RAB TU GRUB PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES BKAG PAS GZHAL BYA GRUB PA TZAM GYIS TSAD MA GRUB PAR SHUGS KYIS BSTAN NO,,

And if one were to accept that, then functional entities could be established without relying on any other causes or conditions.  This is how the denial here is made; as such, what’s being said, by implication, is that accurate perceptions are to be established only by establishing those objects which they take under consideration.


[2467]
DE LTAR NA SNGO ‘DZIN NI GZHAN LUGS LTAR RANG RIG GIS MI ‘GRUB KYI, DBANG PO’I MNGON SUM TSAD MAS ‘GRUB PAR BSTAN TE, DE YOD PA NI SNGO ‘DZIN GYIS GZHAL BYA GRUB PA DE NYID KYIS RTOGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As such, what’s being presented here is the idea that the perception of a patch of blue is not—as other schools would have it—established through some apperception; but rather, through a direct form of accurate perception.  And the fact that that exists can be grasped from the very fact that the perception of blue confirms its own object of consideration.


[2468]
DE’I PHYIR TSAD MA GANG YIN THAMS CAD RANG GI GZHAL BYA GRUB PA DE NYID KYIS ‘GRUB BO,,

And so the fact is that every accurate perception there is, is itself established through the object that it takes under its consideration.



Rejecting rebuttal about
deductive accurate perception

[2469]
GNYIS PA NI,

And with this we have reached the second part of our first step from above: rejecting rebuttal about a deductive form of accurate perception


[2470]
‘O NA LUGS ‘DIS GZUGS BRNYAN DANG SGRA BRNYAN SOGS KYANG SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GZUGS DANG SGRA’I SKYE MCHED SOGS SU BZHAG PA DANG, 

Well then, this particular system—as we noted before—says that things like reflections in a mirror and echoes belong to doors of sense such as visible form, sound, and the like.


[2471]
TSIG GSAL LAS KYANG, ZLA BA GNYIS LA SOGS PA DAG NI RAB RIB CAN MA YIN PA’I SHES PA LA LTOS NAS MNGON SUM NYID MA YIN LA, RAB RIB CAN LA SOGS PA LA LTOS NAS NI MNGON SUM NYID KHO NA’O,

A Clarification of the Verses says as well,

Things like the moon appearing as two moons are not—relative to the vision of a person who does not have cataracts—direct perception itself.  But relative to a person who does have cataracts, they are quite surely direct perception.


[2472]
ZHES LUGS ‘DIS GZUGS SGRA LA SOGS PA’I YUL LA [f. 179b] MNGON SUM GYI SGRA DNGOS MING DANG, DE DAG ‘DZIN PA’I YUL CAN LA BTAGS MING DU BSTAN PA’I SKABS SU ZLA BA GNYIS SNANG SOGS ‘JIG RTEN PA RANG DGA’ BA LA LTOS TE, GZHAL BYA MNGON SUM PA YIN MIN GYI KHYAD YOD KYANG, RANG GI LUGS LA NI ZLA BA GNYIS SNANG SOGS KYANG GZHAL BYA MNGON SUM PA MNGON GYUR DU BZHED PA YIN NO,,

In this system then the description “direct perception” can be applied to how this relates to objects such as visible form and sound; whereas it applies to the subject states that hold to them as a more metaphoric name.  In such circumstances, there is a distinction of whether the object under consideration is direct or not, relative to things like the moon appearing to be two moons.  According to our own system though we would say that things like the moon appearing to be two moons is a directly perceived object under consideration—and thus direct.


[2473]
DE’I PHYIR DBANG PO’I SHES PA ‘JIG RTEN RANG DGA’ BA LA LTOS PA’I ‘KHRUL MA ‘KHRUL GANG YIN KYANG, RANG GI GZHAL BYA GRUB PAS YUL CAN ‘GRUB BO,,

And so we can say that whether or not a sense perception is mistaken with reference to the normal perceptions of the world, the object that it takes under consideration is established; which means that the subject state of mind is also established.


[2474]
‘ON KYANG RANG RIG KHAS MI LEN PA LA GZHI DUS KYI YID SHES SNANG BA DANG, ZHEN YUL LA ‘KHRUL BA RNAMS YOD PAR MI ‘GRUB STE, DE RNAMS LA RANG GI GZHAL BYA ‘JAL BAS YUL CAN GRUB PA MED PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA, 

One may come then with the following question:

But isn’t it the case that—with someone who does not accept the idea of apperception—the consciousness of the thought (assuming one is still in their original state of evolution) and types of perception which are mistaken towards what one thinks that they see, cannot be demonstrated to exist?  Because it is the case that there is no confirmation of the subject states of mind here, as they take under consideration their particular objects of consideration.


[2475]
‘DI LA BSHAD PAR BYA STE LUGS ‘DIS RNAM SHES TSOGS DRUG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I RNAM SHES MI BZHED PAS, DBANG PO GZUGS CAN LA DNGOS SU BRTEN PA’I TSAD MA DANG YID KYI DBANG PO TZAM LA BRTEN PA’I TSAD MA GNYIS LAS NI MED DO,,

Let’s clarify this point then.  This system does not accept the idea of a consciousness which is essentially separate from the collection of six different types of consciousness.  As such, there are only the two types of accurate perception: one which depends directly upon the physical sense organs, and then a second which depends only upon the sense power of the thought.


[2476]
TSAD MA YANG TSIG GSAL LAS, MNGON RJES GNYIS DANG LUNG GI TSAD MA DANG NYER ‘JAL LAM DPES ‘JAL BA’I TSAD MA BZHI BSHAD PA NI RTZOD ZLOG RTZA ‘GREL LA BRTEN PA’O,,

As far as accurate perception, A Clarification of the Verses makes the presentation of four different forms of this perception; these are the two of direct and deductive; accurate perception based upon scriptural authority; and “closely engaging” accurate perception, which we can also call accurate perception that engages in its object through the use of a metaphor.  This presentation into four is based upon the root text and autocommentary to Stopping All Argument.


[2477]
TSAD MA PHYI MA GNYIS NI RJES DPAG TU ‘DU LA BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS KYANG, DNGOS PO THAMS CAD MNGON SUM DU SHES PAS GO BAR BYA BA NI MA YIN GYI RJES SU DPAG PAS RTOGS PAR BYA BA YANG YOD DO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The latter two types of accurate perception can be grouped into the deductive form of this perception; and as the commentary to the 400 Verses puts it, “Not all entities are such that they can be grasped by direct forms of perception; there are also those which must be perceived through the deductive form.”


[2478]
MNGON SUM TSAD MA LA LUGS GZHAN NAS BZHI BSHAD PA’I RANG RIG MNGON SUM [f. 180a] BKAG LA YID KYI MNGON SUM YANG TSAD MA NAS BSHAD PA LTAR MI BZHED DE,

As far as direct forms of accurate perception, apperception as a direct type which appears in the presentation of four types by other systems is denied; and further, direct accurate perception as it is explained in the classics on accurate perception is not accepted either.


[2479]
BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, CHOS MNGON PA NAS GZUGS SOGS LNGA RE RE ZHING DBANG PO DANG YID SHES KYIS SHES PAR BYA BAR GSUNGS PA’I DON ‘CHAD PA NA, RNAM PAR SHES PA GNYIS KYIS DON GCIG RNAM PAR SHES PA MA YIN TE, GCIG NI YUL GYI RNAM PA DNGOS SU GCOD PAR BYED PA STE GANG DANG POR SKYE BA’O,,

The commentary to The 400 Verses has a section where it is giving an explanation of the part in the works on higher knowledge which refer to each of the five of form and the rest; the sense powers; and what is perceived by the consciousness of the thought.  Here it says that it is not the case that two kinds of consciousness can be aware of a single object—because one of them will directly discern the aspect of the object; and this will be the first to arise.



Rejecting rebuttal on another consciousness

[2480]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second step from above: rejecting rebuttal concerning another consciousness of the thoughts.


[2481]
DNGOS SU BYED PA NYID DU RNAM PAR SHES PA MA YIN TE, DBANG PO’I RNAM PAR SHES PA’I STOBS KYIS DE LTAR RTOG CING SKYE BA NA, DES KYANG DON DE RNAM PAR SHES SO ZHES NYE BAR ‘DOGS SO,

We see the following quotation:

Consciousness is not something that happens through a direct process; it occurs rather through the force of the consciousness of the sense power, which perceives the object in a certain way and arises.  Only then can it perceive the object.


[2482]
ZHES DANG PO DBANG SHES KYIS GZUGS SOGS KYI DON DE DNGOS SU RIG LA, YID SHES KYIS DBANG SHES KYI STOBS KYIS RIG GI DBANG SHES BZHIN DU DNGOS SU MI RIG PAR GSUNGS SHING DRAN PAR YANG GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that first the consciousness of the sense power perceives the object—something like visible form or the like—directly.  The consciousness of the thought then perceives the object, through the force of the consciousness of the sense power.  It does not, however directly perceive the object in the same, direct way as the consciousness of the sense power does.  Which is to say, that is also how it recollects.


[2483]
YANG BZHI BRGYA PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS, TSOR BA LA SOGS PA LTAR NYAMS SU MYONG BA’I RNAM PA YANG MA YIN LA, GZUGS DANG SGRA LA SOGS PA BZHIN DBANG PO’I SGO NAS YONGS SU BCAD PAR BYA BA YANG MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS 

The commentary to the 400 Verses also says,

It does not display an aspect of experience which is similar to that of feeling or the like.  But then again neither is it similar to the case with things like visible form and sound, where the final discernment is made through the sense power.


[2484]
MNGON GYUR DU ‘JAL BA LA DBANG SHES KYIS GZUGS SOGS GCOD PA LTA BU DANG, TSOR BA BDE SDUG LA SOGS PA LTAR NANG DU NYAMS MYONG GIS YONGS SU GCOD PA GNYIS GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that there are two variations of discernment: one as in the case of where the consciousness of the sense power would make its discernment through direct consideration; and the other where something like feelings of pleasure or pain would do it through an internal experience.


[2485]
DE GNYIS KYI PHYI MA NI GZHI DUS NAS KYANG KHAS BLANG DGOS LA, MNGON SUM GYI TSAD MA BZHI LAS MANG BA ‘DIR YANG MA BSHAD PA’I PHYIR DANG, RNAL ‘BYOR MNGON SUM [f. 180b] DANG DBANG PO’I MNGON SUM DANG, RANG RIG MNGON SUM TSAD MAR GZHAG TU MI RUNG BAS, YID KYI MNGON SUM DU BZHAG STE, YID KYI MNGON SUM TSAD MA NI TSAD MA BA DANG MI MTHUN MOD, DE LTA NA’ANG YID KYI MNGON SUM TSAD MA MI ‘DOD PA NI MIN NO,,

This is because; first of all, of these two, one would have to agree that the latter could occur as well during the period of the original condition; while in this case they don’t talk about there being more than four different types of direct, accurate perception.  Moreover, it would be inappropriate to posit the direct perception of a deep practitioner; the direct perception of the sense powers; or direct perception through apperception as being forms of accurate perception; and so we’d have to say that this was a form of direct perception in the thoughts.  And yes we would have to agree that a direct form of accurate perception for the thoughts was at odds with the schools dedicated to the study of accurate perception; but despite this fact, it’s not as though one would never agree to a direct form of accurate perception for the thoughts.


[2486]
DE LTAR NA TSOR BA ZHES PA NI BYED PA PO DANG BYED PA DANG LAS DANG ‘BREL BA’I TSIG YIN PAS GANG ZAG ‘DIS TSOR BA DANG, BYED PA ‘DIS TSOR BA DANG, ‘DI ‘DRA BA ZHIG TSOR BA ZHES PA GSUM DU ‘GYUR RO,,

As such, when we use the expression “feelings,” this is a term which is related to the agent in an action; to the action; and to the act.  That is, there are three variations here: you can say that “the person felt something”; or you can say “this action had a feeling”; or “what was felt was like this.”


[2487]
DE’I GNYIS PA NI TSAD MA STE SEMS BYUNG TSOR BA’O,,

The second variation refers to the accurate perception; that is, the mental function of feelings.


[2488]
GSUM PA NI GZHAL BYA STE BDE BA DANG SDUG BSNGAL DANG BTANG SNYOMS SO,,

The third variation would be a reference to what we had under consideration; that is, pleasure, pain, or a neutral sensation.


[2489]
‘DI YANG YID SHES KYI DBANG DU BYAS KYI DBANG SHES KYI TSOR BA GSUM GYIS GZUGS SGRA SOGS YONGS SU GCOD DE, DE’I ‘GRUB TSUL NI SNGAR BSHAD PA BZHIN NO,,

Now the three types of feeling for awareness of the senses relative to the consciousness of the thought discern objects such as visual form and sound; how we establish this follows what we described earlier.


[2490]
‘O NA YID SHES KYI TSOR BAS BDE SDUG SOGS MNGON GYUR DU GCOD NA RANG RIG TU MI ‘GYUR RAM SNYAM NA,

In this case then though one may come with the following question: “If it’s the case that feelings of the consciousness of the thought discern pleasure and pain and the like in a direct way, then wouldn’t that constitute apperception?”


[2491]
SKYON MED DE BKAG PA’I RANG RIG NI SHES PA THAMS CAD KHA NANG LTA LA RIG BYA DANG RIG BYED THA DAD PAR SNANG BA NUB PA’I ‘DZIN RNAM YAN GAR BA YIN ZHING,

And yet there’s no problem here.  The apperception that we deny constitutes a state where all the awareness is focused inward; it is a distinct aspect of holding objects where all appearance of the thing known and the thing knowing it as separate entities is suppressed.


[2492]
‘DIR NI NYAMS SU MYONG BA KHYAD PAR CAN TSOR BA’I MTSAN NYID DU MDO SDER GSUNG LA, ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD LAS KYANG BDE BA DANG SDUG BSNGAL NYAMS SU MYONG NGO ZHES BRJOD PA’I PHYIR,

Here in this case, the collection of sutras describes the definition of feeling as an exceptional form of experiencing.  Moreover, even in the parlance of the world they say things like “I had an experience of pleasure, or of pain.”


[2493]
MYONG BYA DANG MYONG BYED THA DAD PA NYID DU SNANG BA’I PHYIR NA PHYOGS SNGA MA’I RANG RIG DANG MI GCIG GO ,DE’I PHYIR BDE BA SOGS NYAMS SU MYONG BAS GRUB PA NYID KYIS TSOR BA GRUB BO,,

And so because the thing experienced and the thing experiencing it appear with certainty as separate from one another, what we’re describing here is not the same as the apperception accepted by the earlier opponent.  As such, we can say that an occurrence of feeling is confirmed by the very fact of there having been an experience of pleasure or the like.


[2494]
YID SHES KYI NGOR KENG RUS [f. 181a] GSAL SNANG SOGS CHOS KYI SKYE MCHED PA’I GZUGS SNANG BA NA, YID SHES LA DE RNAMS KYI RNAM PA SHAR BA’I SGO NAS DES DE RNAMS GRUB PA NA DE ‘DZIN GYI SHES PA ‘GRUB PA NI SNGAR DANG ‘DRA STE, YUL DE RNAMS NI YID KYI SHES PA LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’O,,

And so let’s say that form which is part of the door of sense of all things makes its appearance, in the form of a vivid image of skeletons for the consciousness of the thought.  The consciousness of the thought here confirms these images by way of their having appeared to this consciousness.  And then establishing that an awareness is perceiving these objects is accomplished in the same way as we described it before.  That is, these objects are essentially separate from the awareness of the thoughts.


[2495]
BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS LTA BU’I YID SHES KYI SHES PA DE JI LTAR ‘GRUB PA NI, TSIG GSAL LAS, GAL TE MTSAN GZHI’AM RANG GI MTSAN NYID DAM SPYI’I MTSAN NYID KYANG RUNG STE, ‘JIG RTEN NA YOD NA NI THAMS CAD MNGON SUM DU DMIGS PAR BYA BA YIN PA’I PHYIR LKOG TU MA GYUR BA YIN TE, DE’I PHYIR DE’I YUL CAN GYI RNAM PAR SHES PA DANG LHAN CIG TU MNGON SUM NYID DU RNAM PAR BZHAG GO ,ZHES GSUNGS PA ‘DIS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

How is it then that we establish perceptions of the consciousness of the thought for things like the two forms of the tendency to believe in some kind of self-existence?  The answer to this question can be understood from the following description found in A Clarification of the Verses—

It doesn’t matter whether we’re talking about a defining occurrence of something; or the definition of something; or the general characteristics of the thing.  When things are said to exist in the everyday world, then all of them are objects which can be observed directly.  As such, they are not what we would call “recondite.”  And for this reason, they are established exclusively as being direct, part & parcel with the relevant subject state of awareness.


[2496]
DE LA MTSAN GZHI DANG MTSON BYA GNYIS SKAD DOD GCIG PAS LO TZ’A BA KHA CIG GIS MTSAN GZHIR BSGYUR, KHA CIG GIS MTSON BYAR BSGYUR RO,,

The original Sanskrit terms for the expressions “defining occurrence” and “thing being defined” are identical; and so certain of the ancient master translators of Tibet rendered the term as “defining occurrence,” and while others rendered it as “thing being defined.” 


[2497]
DES NA ‘DIS MTSON PAR BYED PA’I MTSAN NYID DANG, ‘DI MTSON PAR BYA BA’I MTSAN GZHI THAMS CAD MNGON SUM DU DMIGS PAR BYA BAR BSHAD PA NI, TSAD MA BZHIR BYAS PA’I MNGON SUM TSAD MA NGOS ‘DZIN PA’I SKABS YIN PA’I PHYIR, THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAS MNGON SUM DU DMIGS PAR STON PA YANG MIN LA,

And so let’s take a look at the definition which acts to define the thing; and the objects of the definition—those defining occurrences.  All of these are described as being things that we observe through direct perception.  And this is done in the context of the direct form of accurate perception, as it is identified within the division of accurate perception into four different types.  As such, we can say further that it is not refering to the way in which omniscience itself perceives objects directly.


[2498]
‘DI NYID KYI MJUG THOGS SU LKOG TU GYUR PA’I YUL CAN RTAGS BSGRUB PAR BYA BA LA MI ‘KHRUL BA LAS SKYES PA’I SHES PA NI RJES SU DPAG PA’O,

And then just below the section in A Clarification of the Verses mentioned above, we have the statement that—

Deduction then we describe as a state of mind where the subject state that holds to an object which is recondite is unmistaken, due to confirmation by a logical reason.


[2499]
ZHES GSUNGS PAS RANG SPYI THAMS CAD MNGON GYUR YIN GYI, LKOG GYUR MIN PAR STON PA’ANG MIN NO,,

As such, we can say that typical expressions of objects in the world and the general archetypes of those same objects are all forms of manifest reality; but this is not to say that they can’t be recondite as well.


[2500]
DES NA RANG [f. 181b] SPYI GNYIS GANG LA DMIGS PA’I SHES PA LA’ANG DE GNYIS KYI SNANG BA ‘BYUNG LA, SNANG BA DE NYID NI SHES PA DE’I YUL MNGON SUM STE DE DANG DE’I YUL CAN GYI RNAM SHES GNYIS KA MNGON SUM DU ‘JOG PA NI, YUL LA MNGON SUM GYI SGRA DNGOS DANG YUL CAN LA BTAGS NAS ‘JUG PAR BZHED PA’O,,

And so we can say that the states of mind that focus upon these two—the typical expressions and the general archetypes—take on an aspect of the same two.  And that aspect itself is the manifest object of those states of mind.  Which means that we can describe both the objects here, and the states of mind holding those objects, as being direct, or manifest.  And what we say is that the word “direct” here is being applied to the object involved directly; and to the subject involved in only a nominal way.


[2501]
SHES PA GANG LA GANG GI RNAM PA SNANG BA’I SNANG BA THAMS CAD SHES PA DE’I YUL MNGON SUM YIN NA, SNANG BA DE SHES PA DE LA MNGON GYUR YIN ZHING, DE YANG DE LA MI SLU BA’I SHES PA YIN NA ‘JIG RTEN NA MI SLU BA’I SHES PA LA TSAD MAR GRAGS PAS TSAD MAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG ‘ONG NGO,,

Any time the aspect of any object makes its appearance to any state of mind as the direct object of that mental state, we would say that this appearance is—for that state of mind—direct.  And if the state of mind involved is a perception which is not deceived, then we would follow what the everday world says about an undeceived state of mind constituting accurate perception.  Which means that the state of mind here would then become an “accurate” one.


[2502]
DE’I TSE GZHAL BYA SNANG BA DE SHES PA DE’I GRUB PA NA YUL CAN ‘GRUB PA NI SNGAR BZHIN YIN NO,,

At this point then, if the object under consideration—the appearance—is confirmed for that state of mind, then that state is confirmed as the subject; just as we described it earlier on.


[2503]
DE’I PHYIR BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS LTA BU LA YANG BDAG GNYIS KYI SNANG BA MNGON SUM DU ‘CHAR LA, DE’I TSE GZHAL BYA SNANG BA MNGON GYUR DE YUL CAN DES ‘GRUB PA SOGS SNGAR DANG ‘DRA STE, DES ZHEN YUL LA ‘KHRUL PA GZHAN YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

As such, we can say even with things like the two forms of the tendency to grasp to some self-nature of things that the appearance of two “selfs” here is made directly.  And we can also say at that point things like the fact that the object under consideration is making its appearance directly is confirmed by the subject state of mind; just as we did this earlier.  And from this we can also understand moreover that this state of mind is mistaken towards the object that it thinks it sees.


[2504]
DE LTAR SHES PA RNAMS YUL DU SNANG BA’I SNANG YUL MNGON GYUR GRUB PAR ‘DRA LA, BDAG GNYIS DANG BDAG MED GNYIS DANG, GZUGS SOGS RTAG MI RTAG SOGS LA TSAD MAR ‘GRO MI ‘GRO’I KHYAD PAR CHEN PO YOD PAS, BLO LA TSAD MA DANG TSAD MIN GYI RNAM PAR BZHAG PA’ANG ‘GRUB BO,,

As such, it is in a similar way that we establish that the objects which make their appearance, showing themselves as objects to different states of mind, are direct objects.  At the same time, there is a huge difference between whether or not states of mind are accurate perception relative to the two supposed self-natures and the two absences of any self-nature; and between form and the rest, and things being unchanging & changing.  And thus it is that we can set forth the entire presentation of states of mind being accurate perception, or perception which is not accurate.


[2505]
YID SHES SNANG YUL LA TSAD MAR BSHAD PA DE RNAMS KYANG YUL MNGON GYUR DE RNAMS LA YID KYI MNGON SUM TSAD MAR BYA STE, MTHA’ GZHAN KHEGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

In cases as well where we describe instances of consciousness of the thought as being accurate perception towards the objects which appear to them, what we are saying is that these are a direct form of accurate perception of the thought, towards objects which are themselves direct.  And this is because we have eliminated the other possibilities here.


[2506]
RANG RIG MNGON SUM TSAD MAR MI ‘GYUR TE, YUL DE LA GNYIS KYI SNANG BA DANG BCAS [f. 182a] PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is not the case though that apperception could constitute a direct form of accurate perception; for it is tied up with duality towards its particular object.


[2507]
MNYAM GZHAG GI SHES PA ZAG PA MED PA LA GNYIS SNANG NUB KYANG CHOS NYID DANG DE GNYIS RIG BYA RIG BYED DU ‘GRO BA DANG, SHES PA THAMS CAD KHA NANG LTA LA GNYIS SNANG LOG KYANG RIG BYA RIG BYED DU ‘GRO BA GNYIS RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MI MTSUNGS TE,
	
This duality is suppressed in the case of an unstained form of a state of mind deep inside of balanced meditation; nonetheless, the fact that the true nature of things and this state of mind constitute the object known and the knowing subject is not at all equivalent to a case where all the forms of consciousness are directed inwards, and duality is suppressed in this way, but you still have something known and something else knowing it.


[2508]
PHYI MA LA NI GRUB MTHAS BTAGS PA’I YUL YUL CAN TZAM MA GTOGS PA RTOG PAS YID CI TZAM GTAD KYANG RIG BYA DANG RIG BYED KYI SNANG BA GNYIS MI ‘CHAR LA, SNGA MA LA NI YID GTAD DE BLTAS PA NA YUL CAN SHES PA DANG YUL CHOS NYID KYI RNAM PA THA DAD PA NGES PAR ‘CHAR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

In the latter case, there is nothing more than an object and subject which are imputed by certain schools of thought; that is, no matter how much you direct your thoughts towards them, there will appear to you neither the aspect of something to be known, nor something which knows it.  If though you direct your thoughts towards the former—if you observe it—it is a certainty that a discrete subject state of mind and object of the very nature of things will make their appearance.


[2509]
MNYAM GZHAG RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I YE SHES KYIS RANG GI GZHAL BYA CHOS NYID GRUB PA NA, DE’I STOBS KYIS YUL CAN GYI YE SHES ‘GRUB PA LA, 

When the non-conceptual wisdom of deep, balanced meditation acts to confirm the object that it takes under consideration—that is, the very nature of things—then by the power of this happening, the subject state of wisdom is then established.


[2510]
RIG BYA RIG BYED SO SOR SNANG BA’I GNYIS SNANG LOG PA DANG, GZHAN LUGS KYIS SHES PA THAMS CAD KHA NANG LTA LA GNYIS SNANG LOG PA’I ‘DZIN RNAM YAN GAR BA ‘DOD PA DANG MI MTSUNGS PA’I KHYAD PAR NI ‘BRAS BU’I SA’I SKABS SU ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Now there are positions where we find a belief in a discrete subject aspect which is the blocking of duality in which what is known and what knows it appear to be separate; or the blocking of duality where, according to the other systems, all of the states of mind are focused inward.  But there is a specific point which is not the same as these, and we will be giving an explanation of that when we reach the section of our text which treats the spiritual levels which are a result of our practice.


[2511]
‘DI ‘DRA BA’I RNAM GZHAG PHRA MO NI RANG GIS GZHAN LA, ‘DI YI YOD PA GANG GIS SHES PAR ‘GYUR, ZHES SOGS KYI GNOD PA BRJOD PA TSUR LA BZLOG PA NA,

And so suppose that our opponent turns the tables and addresses us with the same fault in our argument that we originally addressed to them, considering this subtle presentation with the question, “And what is it that allows you to understand the existence of this thing?”


[2512]
CHEN PO RNAMS KYI LUGS SO SO BA’I RNAM GZHAG PHRA MO MI SHES SHING, RANG GI LUGS NGES DON GYI LUNG GI DON PHRA MO DANG, SHIN TU RTOGS DKA’ BA’I RIGS LAM PHRA MO NAS ‘DREN MI SHES PA RNAMS KYIS,

Which is to say, there are those who have no understanding of the different and subtle presentations made by the great ones; or of the subtle import of citations even in their own system which happen to be literal; or how to draw these truths from extremely subtle logical arguments here which are extremely difficult to grasp.


[2513]
KHO BO’I PHYOGS LA KHAS LEN MED PAS SKYON DU MI ‘GYUR [f. 182b] RO, ZHES BSNYON ‘DINGS PA TZAM LA RE BA RNAMS LA MI DGOS KYANG,

Now it may be the case that there are those who put their hopes in the positions of people who are nothing more than nut cases—those who say “There’s no problem here, because our position is unique in that we take no position at all.”  The points we have made here would be of no use to them.


[2514]
SKYE BO MKHAS PA MDZANGS SHING PHRA BA’I BLO CAN RIGS PA’I GNAD PHRA MOS SKYON YON SO SOR ‘BYED PA’I LAM MA MTHONG BAR YID MI CHES PA RNAMS KYI

And for their part they have had no sight into the path where truly wise individuals—great masters with the capacity to delve into the subtle keys of reasoning—divide out the weaknesses and the strengths of ideas; which is to say, they have no belief in these.


[2515]
DON DU BSAMS NAS, BDAG GIS LUGS DAM PA ‘DI SKYON MED PAR ‘JOG PA’I PHYOGS ‘DI’I SGO TZAM ZHIG BSTAN PA YIN NO,,

I for my part was giving some thought to the opinions of these individuals, and decided then to make the presentation I have offered here, just a brief sketch of ideas which serve to demonstrate how this perfect position is free of any fault at all.


[2516]
‘O NA NGAS SNGON PO MTHONG NGO ZHES DRAN PA’I NGA NI GANG ZAG YIN LA, SNGO ‘DZIN GYI SHES PA DANG DE GNYIS ‘GAL BAS DE LTAR DRAN PA DE SNGO ‘DZIN DRAN PAR JI LTAR ‘GYUR SNYAM NA,

The following thought might then occur to someone—

When we say “I saw that patch of blue” and thus recollect a “me,” that is a person.  And being a person is contradictory to being a state of mind which perceives the color blue.  How is it then that this recollection of having perceived blue can occur?


[2517]
SNGO ‘DZIN GYI MIG SHES DANG SNGON PO MTHONG MKHAN GYI GANG ZAG GNYIS ‘GAL YANG, SHES PA DES SNGON PO MTHONG BA LA BRTEN NAS NGAS MTHONG NGO ZHES ‘JOG PA MI ‘GAL BA

It is true, first of all, that being the visual awareness which holds to a patch of blue, and being a person who is someone that has seen blue, are two mutually exclusive entities.  Nonetheless, it is still no contradiction to say “I saw the blue, by relying upon how that state of mind saw the blue.”


[2518]
BZHIN DU SNGO ‘DZIN GYI SHES PAS SNGON PO MTHONG BA DRAN PA LA BRTEN NAS NGAS SNGAR SNGON PO MTHONG NGO ZHES GANG ZAG DRAN PA DES SNGO ‘DZIN GYI SHES PA DRAN PA YANG CI ZHIG ‘GAL,

How then could you say that there was any contradiction in stating, “I saw some blue before,” based on the fact that you could recollect how the perception of blue saw the blue?  That is, recalling the person enables us to recall the state of mind that was holding to the blue.



Other proofs of illogic

[2519]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third part from before: a demonstration that apperception is illogical even according to other proofs.


	[2520]
[VI.76]
Tasmāt svasaṃvedanam asti naiva
kenānya tantra grahaṇaṃ tava syāt,
Kartuś ca karma kriyayoś ca naikyaṃ
tenaiva tasya grahaṇaṃ na yuktam.

,DE PHYIR RANG RIG YOD PA MA YIN NA,
,KHYOD KYI GZHAN DBANG GANG GIS ‘DZIN PAR ‘GYUR,
,BYED PO LAS DANG BYA BA GCIG MIN PAS,
,DE NYID KYIS DE ‘DZIN PAR RIGS MA YIN,

		Therefore, apperception
		Is something that
		Doesn’t exist;

		What is it then
		That holds to your
		Dominated entities?

		The agent,
		The object of the action,
		And the act
		Are not one & the same.

		As such,
		It would be inappropriate
		To say that this
		Were doing the holding.


[2521]
GANG GI PHYIR DE LTA YIN PA DE’I PHYIR RANG RIG YOD PA MA YIN NA, SEMS TZAM PA KHYOD KYI GZHAN DBANG SHES PA GANG GIS ‘DZIN PAR ‘GYUR SHING GCOD PA’I BYED PA PO DANG, BCAD PA’I LAS SU BYA BA SHING DANG, SHING GCOD PA’I BYA BA GSUM GCIG MIN PAS SHES PA DE NYID KYIS DE ‘DZIN PAR RIGS PA MA YIN NO,,

For the reason that we have expressed above, we can say that therefore apperception is something that doesn’t exist, and we ask you members of the Mind Only school just what kind of state of mind it is that holds to your dominated entities.  After all, these three—the agent that acts to cut a tree; and the tree which is the object of the action of the cutting; and the act of cutting the tree itself—are not one & the same.  As such, it would be inappropriate to say that this state of mind itself were doing the holding.


[2522]
‘DI’I GNOD PA ‘BAB TSUL NI BDEN GNYIS RANG ‘GREL LAS SHES PA’I BDAG NYID LA NI, RDUL PHRA RAB DAG DANG GNYIS PO MED PA’I DNGOS PO’I NGO BO MI SNANG NGO, ,MI SNANG BA LA NI THA SNYAD MED DO ZHES PA [f. 183a] GSAL TE,

The way in which the problem applies here is clearly expressed in the autocommentary to Distinguishing Between the Two Realities:

It is not the case that smallest particles of matter, or some kind of essential nature to things where they were beyond any duality, could ever make their appearance to an embodiment of perception; and there is no term that can be applied to something that never makes its appearance.


[2523]
SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI SHES PA KHA NANG LTA LA GNYIS SNANG MED PA’I MYONG TZAM KHO RANG GI RIG BYA DANG, KHO RANG DE’I RIG BYED DU ‘JOG PA LA DE LA JI TZAM GTAD KYANG RTOG PA LA YANG RIG BYA DANG RIG BYED GNYIS SU MI SNANG BA DE LA RIG BYA RIG BYED KYI BYA BYED ‘JOG NA, BYED PA PO DANG LAS DANG BYA BA GZHAN YANG GCIG TU HA CANG THAL BA ‘JUG PA YIN NO,,

As we explained before, it doesn’t matter how much we focus our minds towards a state of mind which is free of subject & object duality; which is only an experiencing entity—something which can be said to be both what it itself knows, and also the one doing the knowing.  It will never be the case then this could ever appear to our conception as both what is known and what does the knowing.  And if we were then to posit these were indeed act and actor in the the sense of what is known and what knows, it would be just too much to say that the agent and the act and the action—all separate things—would be one & the same.


[2524]
DES NA SLOB DPON CHEN PO YE SHES SNYING PO NI, SEMS TZAM PA’I RANG RIG DANG NYAN THOS SDE PA’I RDUL CHA MED GNYIS YOD MED JI LTA BA BZHIN MTSUNGS PAR BZHED DE, RDUL CHA MED LA YANG YUL GYI GO SA GNON PA NI DGOS LA, DE’I RNAM PA SHAR BA NA PHYOGS KYI CHA BCAS MIN PA ‘CHAR SA MED DO,,

Thus it is then that the great master Jnanagarbha is here taking the position that these two—the apperception posited by those of the Mind Only, and the partless physical particles accepted by the Listener schools—are equivalent, in either existing or not.  That is, even a particle of matter which had no sides would have to occupy a particular space; and if it were to appear as such, then there is no way that it could ever make this appearance without sides in different directions.


[2525]
DES NA DE GNYIS KYI RIG BYA RIG BYED DANG PHYOGS KYI CHA MED NI GRUB MTHAS BTAGS PA ‘BA’ ZHIG GO ,DES NA DE GNYIS SNANG YANG MA NGES PA YIN PA YANG BKAG STE, BDEN GNYIS RANG ‘GREL LAS, GAL TE SNANG BA BZHIN DU YANG DE NGES PAR MI ZIN SNYAM NA, DES NA CI DE LTA BU LA NI THA SNYAD MED DO, ,SNANG ZHES BYA BA YANG YID CHES PA MED PA’I PHYIR MNA’ CHU BTUNG DGOS SO, ZHES SNANG BA LA YANG SGRUB BYED MNA’ TZAM DU ZAD DO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

As such, we can say that the ideas of these two groups—something we know which is also the knower; and particles with no directions to them—are nothing more than inventions of their respective systems.  And as such, we are in addition denying the idea that the way things appear as subjects & objects could itself be indefinite; as the autocommentary to the Two Realities again puts it,

Suppose you think to yourself, “Even as this makes its appearance, it is not with certainty perceived.”  But the fact is that when something is like that, there can be no term to describe it.  To simply state that something was appearing would have to be just something that you swore was true.

Which is to say, the only proof you could give for the thing indeed making an appearance would be no more than your swearing it were so.


[2526]
LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS GSUNGS PA’I RIGS PAS KYANG RANG RIG MI RIGS TE,
,JI LTAR RAL GRIS RANG GI SO,
,GCOD PAR MI BYED SOR MOS NI,
,RANG LA REG PAR MI BYED LTAR,
,RANG RIG SEMS KYANG DE BZHIN NO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The logic described in the Journey to Langka also describes how the idea of apperception is illogical—

A knife cannot cut
Its own blade;

The tip of a finger
Cannot touch itself.

A state where the mind
Could know itself
Would be just the same.



Things the same as no one

[2527]
BZHI PA NI,

Which brings us to our fourth part from above: establishing that dominated entities which existed through some nature of their own would be the equivalent of the child of a barren woman.


	[2528]
[VI.77]
Ajñāya mānātmakam apyajātaṃ
bhāvo yadi syāt paratantra rūpaḥ,
Vandhyāsutenāpakṛtaṃ parasya
kiṃ nāma yenāsya na vetti sattvam.

,GAL TE SKYE BA MED CING MA SHES PA’I,
,BDAG CAN GZHAN DBANG NGO BO’I DNGOS YOD NA,
,GANG GIS NA ‘DI YOD PA MI RIGS PA,
,[f. 208a] GZHAN LA MO GSHAM BUS NOD CI ZHIG BSKYAL,

		Suppose that
		There is nothing
		Which can start,

		And that
		There does exist
		An entity which is
		A dominated one
	
		And has a nature
		Such that it is
		Not perceived.

		There is yet
		Another why
		It would be illogical
		To say that such existed [f. 208a]:

		The child of a
		Barren woman
		Has done so much damage.


[2529]
GZHAN DBANG BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS MI SKYE BAR NI SNGAR BSTAN ZIN LA, DE ‘JAL [f. 183b] BA’I RANG RIG KYANG MED PAR DA LTA NYID DU BSTAN PAS,

We have already, previously, demonstrated that dominated entities can grow neither from themselves, nor from something other than themselves.  And we have just shown how apperception is not something which could exist.


[2530]
GAL TE RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED CING TSAD MAS MA SHES PA’I BDAG NYID CAN GYI GZHAN DBANG RANG GIS NGO BOS GRUB PA’I DNGOS PO YOD NA, RGYU MTSAN GANG GIS NA ‘DI YOD PAR MI RIGS PA GZHAN TE

Suppose then that there is nothing which can start through any nature of its own; but that there does exist an entity which exists through some nature of its own which is a dominated entity and has a nature such that it is not perceived by any accurate perception.  There is yet another reasoning why it would be illogical to say that such a thing existed.


[2531]
SEMS TZAM PA KHYOD LA MO GSHAM GYI BUS GNOD PA CI ZHIG BSKYAL NAS DE YOD PAR MI ‘DOD DE YOD PAR ‘DOD DGOS TE, ‘DI LTAR MO GSHAM GYI BU ZHES BYA BA SPROS PA THAMS CAD LAS ‘DAS SHING ‘PHAGS PA’I YE SHES KYI SPYOD YUL DU GYUR PA, BRJOD DU MED PA’I RANG BZHIN CAN ZHIG YOD DO ZHES ‘DI YANG YOD PA NYID DU ‘DOD PAR GYIS SHIG

And so how can you proponents of the Mind Only school refuse to accept the existence of the child of a barren woman, when this child has done so much damage to you?  You should be saying that they actually do exist.  After all, you are the ones who say that there is a child of this woman who is free of all projections of reality, and who is the object that the wisdom of the realized beings engages in; something which has a nature which is beyond all describing.  And so you should also be saying that this impossible child exists as well!



Failure of the Mind Only

[2532]
,GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second step from before: a demonstration that the Mind Only system fails from the viewpoint of both of the realities.


	[2533]
[VI.78]
Yadānya tantraṃ na samasti kiṃcit
kiṃ sāṃvṛtānāṃ hi nibandhanaṃ syāt,
Dravyasya lobhena parasya naṣṭāḥ 
sarvā vyavasthā api loka siddhāḥ.

,GANG TSE GZHAN DBANG CUNG ZAD YOD MIN NA,
,KUN RDZOB PA YI RGYUR NI GANG ZHIG ‘GYUR,
,GZHAN GYI LTAR NA RDZAS LA CHAGS PA YIS,
,’JIG RTEN GRAGS PA’I RNAM BZHAG KUN KYANG BRLAG

	At such point
That there did not exist
Even the slightest
Dominated entities,

Then how could
Something ever exist
As a deceptive reason?

If it accords to
These other ones,
Attached to thinking
Of that substance,

Then the way that
The everyday world
Posits how things exist
Is completely lost.


[2534]
GANG YANG DNGOS PO BRTAGS {%BTAGS} PAR YOD PA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR ZHING, ZHES SMRAS PA DE YANG GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD NA RIGS PA ZHIG NA,

We see the lines that refer to “anything it is that could be a cause for entities which exist only by imputation.”  These are referring to yet another line of reasoning which would obtain if dominated entities were to exist through some nature of their own.


[2535]
GANG GI TSE GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA CUNG ZAD KYANG YOD PA MIN NA, THA SNYAD KUN RDZOB PA’I ‘KHRUL PA’I RGYU STE GZHI RDZAS SU GRUB PAR NI GANG ZHIG ‘GYUR TE CUNG ZAD KYANG MED DO,,

At such point that there did not exist even the slightest dominated entities which existed through some nature of their own, then how could something ever exist as a deceptive, a nominal, reason for error—how could the foundation here exist substantially?  There could exist not the slightest such thing.


[2536]
DES NI GZHAN DBANG DON DAM DU GRUB PAR ‘DOD PAS DON DAM LAS NYAMS PAR BSTAN NO,,

What this is saying is that those who accept the idea that dominated entities could exist in some ultimate way have degenerated from the idea of the ultimate.


[2537]
DE’I PHYIR SEMS TZAM PA ‘DI LA ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KYI RGYU GANG YIN PA DE RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS YOD PA MIN PAS, KYE MA KYE HUD GZHAN SEMS TZAM PA’I LTAR NA NGES DON MTHAR THUG PA ‘BYED PA’I SHES RAB KYI RTZAL MED PAS GZHAN DBANG GI RDZAS SHES TZAM LA BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I CHAGS PA YI SGO NAS, GZHAN DBANG GI BUM PA SO MA BTANG BAR,

As such, let’s consider these followers of the Mind Only.  If it is the fact that what we say is that the cause in the parlance of the world is not something that could exist through any essential nature of its own, then oh my gosh!  According to these other ones—the Mind Only (since they possess none of the fluency of wisdom which makes distinctions regarding the ultimate point of what was truly intended)—then dominated entities exist only as a mental substance, and are still real.  These thinkers are attached to thinking of them thus, as real, and in this manner they approach a clay pot of the concept of dominated entities that was never properly fired.


[2538]
TSUL MIN GYI DPYAD PA CHU DANG ‘DRA BA BLUGS [f. 184a] NAS, RANG GI BLO GROS KYI TSUL NGAN PA’I PHYIR TE RGYU MTSAN GYIS, ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA’I RNAM GZHAG ‘JIG RTEN KHO NA LAS GRUB PA ‘DUG CIG SONG ZHIG BYOS SHIG ,CES PA SOGS DANG

And then into this unready vessel they pour the water of their faulty thinking, which demonstrates the awful workings of their level of intelligence—the thinking that forces them to say things like “the way that the everyday world posits how things exist is something that only works for the world.  This is how it is, and this is how we should take it.”


[2539]
DE BZHIN DU PHYI’I GZUGS DANG PHYI’I DMIGS PA LAS SKYES PA’I TSOR BA LA SOGS PA DE DAG KUN KYANG BRLAG PA STE ‘JIG PAR BYED DO,,

And then in this same way they completely lose—they completely demolish—everything such as how feelings arise from outer form: from outer objects of perception.


[2540]
DE’I PHYIR SEMS TZAM PA ‘DI LA RGUD PA ‘BA’ ZHIG SRID PAR ‘GYUR GYI, MNGON PAR MTHO BA STE PHUL DU BYUNG BA’I GO ‘PHANG NI ‘THOB PA MA YIN NO,,

Thus it seems the case that these Mind Only fellows have only brought trouble upon themselves; and they fail to reach the heights; which is to say, that most wonderful state of being.


[2541]
PHYI ROL BKAG NA SONG ZHIG LA SOGS PA YANG MED PAR ‘GYUR BA’I RIGS PAS, DE RNAMS PHYI ROL LA ‘BREL BA’O,,

Even when they try to dispel the ideas of the non-Buddhists, they are presenting reasoning which would never make anyone depart from these, for example, as they would like them to—which is to say, they actually end up aligning themselves somewhat with these very non-Buddhists.


[2542]
‘DIS NI KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA LAS NYAMS PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

What we have demonstrated here then is how the Mind Only school has lost the proper concept of deceptive reality.



Following the Arya

[2543]
GSUM PA NI,

With this we have reached our third step from above: a description of how—therefore—it is appropriate to follow the system of Arya Nagarjuna, exclusively.


	[2544]
[VI.79]
Ācārya Nāgārjuna pāda mārgād
bahir gatānāṃ na śivābhyupāyaḥ,
Bhraṣṭā hi te saṃvṛti tattva satyāt
tad bhraṃśataś cāsti na mokṣa siddhiḥ.

,SLOB DPON KLU SGRUB ZHABS KYI LAM LAS NI,
,PHYI ROL GYUR LA ZHI BA’I THABS MED DO,
,DE DAG KUN RDZOB DE NYID BDEN LAS NYAMS,
,DE LAS NYAMS PAS THAR PA ‘GRUB YOD MIN,

		Those who have
		Wandered away
		From the path of
		Our master, Nagarjuna,

		Lack the method
		Needed to attain peace.

		These people have lost
		The true concepts
		Of deceptive reality
		And the reality
		Of suchness.

		Once we have lost this,
		There is no possibility
		That we can achieve freedom.


[2545]
DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR SLOB DPON PHYIN CI LOG STE DRANG BA’I DON LA NGES PA’I DON DU ‘CHAD PA LAS, SANGS RGYAS KYI DGONGS PAR MA SONG BA’I RANG GI RNAM PAR RTOG PAS SBYAR BA’I LUGS KYI LAM KHO NAR ZHUGS PA, 

And so we can say that these masters are mistaken, and that what they are explaining as the literal meaning of scripture is actually the figurative meaning.  They have entered only into a path which does not represent the actual intent of the Buddhas, but rather is a system that they have simply concocted by themselves.


[2546]
SLOB DPON ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB ZHABS KYIS SROL PHYE BA’I LAM LAS NI PHYI ROL TU GYUR PA LA ZHI BA MYANG ‘DAS ‘THOB PA’I THABS KYI GTZO BO MED DO,,

They have wandered away from the path of the system introduced by our master, the Realized One, Nagarjuna; and they lack the primary method which is needed to attain peace—nirvana.


[2547]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, ‘DI LTAR PHYI ROL TU GYUR PA DE DAG NI KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA DANG DE NYID DON DAM BDEN PA LAS NGES PAR NYAMS PAR ‘GYUR LA, BDEN GNYIS DE LAS NYAMS PAS KYANG DE MA BTANG GI BAR DU THAR PA ‘GRUB PA YOD PA MIN NO,,

And why is this the case?  People who have wandered away from this particular system have—quite certainly—lost the true concepts of deceptive reality and ultimate reality: suchness.  And once we have lost this teaching on the two realities, then until we have given up those mistaken ideas there is no possibility that we can achieve freedom.


	[2548]
[VI.80]
Upāya bhūtaṃ vyavahārasatyam
upeya bhūtaṃ paramārtha satyam,
Tayor vibhāgaṃ na paraiti yo vai
mithyāvikalpaiḥ sa kumārgayātaḥ

,THA SNYAD BDEN PA THABS SU GYUR PA DANG,
,DON DAM BDEN PA THABS BYUNG GYUR PA STE,
,DE GNYIS RNAM DBYE GANG GIS MI SHES PA,
,DE NI RNAM RTOG LOG PAS LAM NGAN ZHUGS,

		There is nominal reality,
		Which becomes a method,
		And ultimate reality,
		Which comes from the method.

		Any person who fails
		To understand the divisions
		Of these two has entered
		Into a mistaken path,
		Of mistaken ideas.


[2549]
YANG CI’I PHYIR BDEN GNYIS LAS NYAMS PAS THAR PA MI ‘GRUB CE NA,

“And how is it,” one may ask, “that they have lost the concepts of the two realities, and thus cannot reach freedom?”


[2550]
THA SNYAD BDEN PA’I RNAM GZHAG MA LOG PA NI, [f. 184b] DON DAM BDEN PA JI BZHIN DU RTOGS PA’I THABS SU GYUR PA DANG, DON DAM BDEN PA JI BZHIN RTOGS PA NI SNGAR BSHAD PA’I THABS LAS BYUNG BAR GYUR PA STE, BDEN PA DE GNYIS KYI RNAM DBYE GANG GIS MI SHES PA DE NI PHYIN CI LOG GI RNAM PAR RTOG PAS LAM NGAN PAR ZHUGS PA’O,,

When we are free of any tendency to go wrong in how we set forth nominal reality, this then becomes a method to understand ultimate reality in the proper way.  And when we do grasp ultimate reality correctly, this has come from the method that we described before.  That is, any person who fails to understand the divisions of these two realities has entered into a mistaken path, due to their mistaken ideas.


[2551]
‘DIS NI THA SNYAD KYI RNAM GZHAG SKYON MED PA ZHIG MA BYUNG BAR DU DON DAM BDEN PA JI BZHIN DU MI RTOG PAR BSTAN PA’O,,

What these lines are describing is how—until such time as we arrive at a truly unmistaken presentation of the nominal—we will never grasp ultimate reality correctly.


[2552]
DE’I PHYIR KLU SGRUB KYIS SROL PHYE BA’I LUGS KHO NA’I RJES SU ‘BRANG BAR BYA’O,,

As such, we should seek to follow only that system which was introduced to the world by Nagarjuna.


[2553]
TSUL DE NYID MDOS SGRUB PA LA DE KHO NA NYID NGES PAR BSTAN PA’I TING NGE ‘DZIN LAS,
,’JIG RTEN MKHYEN PAS GZHAN LA MA GSAN PAR,
,BDEN PA ‘DI GNYIS NYID KYIS BSTAN PAR MDZAD,
,GANG ZHIG KUN RDZOB DE BZHIN DON DAM STE,
,BDEN PA GSUM PA GANG YANG MA MCHIS SO,

The exact way this works is established in sutra, and described as follows in Concentration which Reveals Suchness—

The Knower of the World,
Without hearing
These things from others,

Undertook to teach
By using these two different
Types of reality.

These were the deceptive
And the ultimate;

And it’s an impossibility
For there to exist
Any kind of third reality.


[2554]
ZHES PAS NI SANGS RGYAS KYIS RANG DBANG DU BDEN GNYIS BSTAN PA DANG SHES BYA THAMS CAD BDEN GNYIS SU GRANGS NGES PAR BSTAN NO,,

What this is saying is that the Buddha has on his own accord given the teaching on the two realities; and that all existing entities are divided among exactly two realities.


[2555]
DE NAS,
,GANG GIS BDE BAR GSHEGS LA ‘GRO BA RNAMS,
,BDE BA’I DON DU DAD PA SKYE ‘GYUR BA,
,RGYAL BAS ‘GRO BA RNAMS KYI DON SLAD DU,
,’JIG RTEN PHAN PHYIR KUN RDZOB DE BSTAN TO,
ZHES PAS NI KUN RDZOB BSTAN PA’I DGOS PA BSTAN NO,,

The same teaching then presents the following lines, in order to describe the goal of teaching deceptive reality:

There is a teaching
That was given
For the comfort
Of living beings,

So that they would
Feel faith for the one
Who had Gone To Bliss.

And so for the sake
Of living beings,
And to help
The entire world,

The Victors undertook
To teach the deceptive.


	[2556]
,SEMS CAN TSOGS KYI ‘GRO DRUG GANG BSTAN PA,
,SEMS CAN DMYAL DANG DUD ‘GRO YI DVAGS DANG,
,LHA MIN RIS DANG MI DANG LHA YI RNAMS,
,MI YI SENG+GES KUN RDZOB BTAGS PA MDZAD,

Lord Buddha described the method of teaching the deceptive as follows:

Here is what
That Lion Among People
Gave the name
Of “the deceptive”—

All those that he taught
As the six types of birth
Among the mass of beings:

The beings of hell;
The animals,
The craving spirits,
The demigods,
The humans,
And the worldly gods.


	[2557]
,RIGS DMA’ DE BZHIN MTHO BA’I RIGS RNAMS [f. 185a] DANG,
,PHYUG PO’I KHYIM DANG DBUL PO’I KHYIM RNAMS DANG,
,BRAN GYI TSOGS DANG DE BZHIN G-YOG GI TSOGS,
,BUD MED TSOGS DANG SKYES PA MA NING DANG,

And so we see
Those of lower class,
And just so those
Of the higher classes.

We see households
Of the wealthy,
And households too
Of the poor.

We see masses of slaves,
And masses of servants,
And masses of women,
And masses of men,
And masses of those
Who are neuters.


	[2558]
,’GRO BA’I KHYAD PAR JI SNYED GANG YANG RUNG,
,MTSUNGS MED KHYOD KYIS ‘JIG RTEN BSTAN MDZAD PA,
,KUN RDZOB BDEN PAR MKHAS PAS THUGS CHUD NAS,
,’JIG RTEN MKHYEN PAS MI LA DE BSTAN TO,
ZHES PAS NI KUN RDZOB BSTAN TSUL GSUNGS SO,,

	And so you,
	O Matchless One,
	Have described all the different
	Types of beings that there may be.

	Those who became wise
	In deceptive reality
	Grasped all that you taught
	About this world;

	And so it was that you,
	Knower of the World,
	Granted instruction
To human kind. 


	[2559]
,’DI LA DGA’ BA’I ‘GRO BA ‘KHOR BA NA {%NI},
,’GRO BA’I CHOS BRGYAD LA NI ‘JUG ‘GYUR TE,
,THOB DANG MA THOB SNYAN DANG MI SNYAN DANG,
,BSTOD DANG SMAD DANG BDE DANG SDUG BSNGAL LO,

And then he continued with—

Beings who delight
In all of this
Come to engage
In the eight attitudes
Of those in the cycle:

Gain and loss,
Fame and ill-repute,
Praise and criticism,
Pleasure and pain.


	[2560]
,THOB PA RNYED NA DE LA CHAGS PA SKYE,
,MA THOB GYUR NA DES KYANG ‘KHRUG PAR ‘GYUR,
,GANG GZHAN MA BSTAN TSUL ‘DIS SHES PAR BYA,
,NAD RNAMS BRGYAD KYIS DE RGYUN GNOD PAR GYUR,

If they happen
To acquire something,
They begin to feel attachment.

If they fail
To gain something,
Then they get upset.

In a case where the rest
Are not shared,
You can understand them
From this way of things.

People are attacked
Incessantly
By these eight great illnesses.


[2561]
ZHES PAS NI KUN RDZOB PA ‘DI LA BDEN PAR ZHEN NAS DGA’ BA NI ‘JIG RTEN GYI CHOS BRGYAD LA ‘JUG CING DES MNAR NAS ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHOR BA DANG CHOS BRGYAD KYI DANG PO GNYIS BSTAN PAS LHAG MA MA BSTAN PA SHES PAR BYA BAR GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that people are attached to believing that these deceptive entities are reality; and this in turn impels them to engage in those eight different attitudes.  This in turn tortures them; and then they are spun around in the wheel of pain.  And once we teach someone the first two of the eight attitudes here, they can go on to understand all of the rest as well, even if we don’t explicitly share those with them.


	[2562]
,KUN RDZOB DE LA DON DAM SU SMRA BA,
,DE DAG NOR PA’I BLO LDAN SHES PAR BYA,
ZHES PAS NI KUN RDZOB PA ‘GRO BA DRUG LA SOGS PA LA DON DAM STE BDEN PAR GRUB PA ZHES SU SMRA BA DE DAG PHYIN CI LOG GI BLO CAN DU SHES PAR BYA BAR GSUNGS PAS RANG SDE DE LTAR ‘DOD PA RNAMS GRUB MTHA’ NOR BAR GSUNGS SO,,

	You should understand
	That those who describe
	The deceptive as being
	The ultimate possess
	A mind that is mistaken.

And what this is saying is that those who profess that the deceptive—a reference to things like the six forms of suffering life—is “ultimate,” meaning something that exists as real, should be understood as having minds which are mistaken.  That is to say, those whose schools of thought accept this kind of idea are being described as mistaken systems.
	

	[2563]
,MI SDUG SDUG DANG SDUG BSNGAL BDE BA DANG,
,[f. 185b] BDAG MED RANG BZHIN BDAG TU SMRA BA DANG,
,MI RTAG CHOS LA RTAG CES SMRA BGYID CING,

They claim that
Was is not attractive
Is attractive;
And that pain
Is happiness.

And they say
That things which
Have no self
Have a nature
Of being a self.

They make the claim
That things which are
Impermanent
Will somehow last.


	[2564]
,DE LTAR DGA’ STE MTSAN MAR GANG GNAS PA,
,DE DAG BDE GSHEGS GSUNG NI THOS GYUR NA,
,’JIGS SHING JI BZHIN MI RTOGS SPONG PAR BGYI,

They delight in these thoughts,
And stay in signs.

When people like this
Hear the speech of those
Who have Gone to Bliss,

They are terrified,
And fail to understand them,
And so discard these words.


	[2565]
,DE DAG BDER GSHEGS GSUNG NI SPANGS GYUR NAS,
,SEMS CAN DMYAL BAR SDUG BSNGAL MI BZAD MYONG,
,DE DAG TSUL MIN BDE BA TSOL BGYID KYANG,
,SDUG BSNGAL BRGYA DAG BYIS PAS MYONG BAR ‘GYUR,

Having rejected
The holy speech of those
Who’ve Gone to Bliss,

People like this
Experience unending pain
In the realms of hell.

They seek thus happiness
In all the wrong ways;
And then these children
Suffer from a thousand pains.


[2566]
ZHES PAS NI PHYIN CI LOG BZHI LA GOMS PA DANG DE ‘THAD PA’I GRUB MTHAS BSLAD PA PHYI ROL PA RNAMS NI, SANGS RGYAS KYI GSUNG THOS NA SPONG ZHING DE’I MTHUS SEMS CAN DMYAL BAR ‘GRO BA DANG, DE DAG GIS THAR PA’I BDE BA TSUL BZHIN MIN PA’I THABS KYIS BTZAL YANG, DE MI RNYED PAR MA ZAD SDUG BSNGAL DU MAS MNAR BAR ‘GYUR BAR BSTAN NO,,

What this is teaching us is that there are non-Buddhists who become very accustomed to the four different reversed ways of thinking mentioned here, and who are infected by schools of thought which believe that they are correct.  When people like this happen to hear the words of the Buddha, they reject them; and by the power of this they pass to the realms of hell.  These kinds of individuals undertake a search for the happiness of freedom through mistaken means; but not only do they fail to find this happiness, they instead come to be tortured by a great many sufferings.


	[2567]
,’JIG RTEN PHAN PA’I BSTAN PA SU ZHIG GIS,
,MA LOG BLO YIS RNAM PAR RTOGS GYUR NA,
,SBRUL GYI PAGS PA RNYING LTAR RAB SPANGS TE,
,SRID PA KUN LAS ‘DAS NAS ZHI BAR ‘GYUR,

This is a teaching
Which brings help
To the entire world;

Those who grasp it
With a mind
Free of error

Pass beyond all
Of this suffering life.

They leave it behind
Like a snake that sheds
Its old skin, and come
To peace.


	[2568]
,CHOS ‘DI THAMS CAD RANG BZHIN DBEN PA STE,
,STONG PA MTSAN MA MED PA DON DAM ZHES,
,GANG GIS THOS NAS DGA’ BA SKYE ‘GYUR BA,
,DE DAG BLA MED BYANG CHUB THOB PAR ‘GYUR,

Each and every one
Of all the things here
Is devoid of any nature
Of its own.

They are empty,
They have no signs;
They are what we call
The ultimate.

Those who hear these words
And feel delight arise
Within their heart

Are the kinds of people
Who will come to reach
That matchless Enlightenment.


	[2569]
,RGYAL BA KHYOD KYIS PHUNG PO DBEN PAR GZIGS,
,KHAMS DANG SKYE MCHED RNAMS KYANG DE BZHIN TE,
,DBANG PO’I GRONG NI MTSAN MAS DBEN PA DAG
,KUN KYANG THUB PA KHYOD KYIS JI BZHIN GZIGS,

O Ones of Victory,
You have seen
That the heaps are void;

And that the elements
And the doors of sense
Are just the same.

The city of the sense powers
Is devoid of any signs;

And all of these too
Are seen just as they are
By you, o Able One.


[2570]
ZHES BSTAN PA GSUNG RAB ZAB MO’I DON PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR [f. 186a] RTOGS NA, ‘KHOR BA LAS GROL BAR BSTAN NAS, RTOGS TSUL DE JI ‘DRA ZHIG SNYAM PA LA,

And then what this is saying is that it has been taught that—if we are able to grasp, unerringly, the meaning of the teachings, that most profound of the highest of spoken words—then we will gain liberation from the cycle of pain.  One might wonder then just how it is that we should accomplish this understanding.


[2571]
CHOS ‘DI THAMS CAD RANG BZHIN DBEN PA SOGS KYI GTAM THOS PA NA DGA’ NAS DE’I DON RTOGS NA BYANG CHUB ‘THOB PAR GSUNGS TE, SNGAR KUN RDZOB BSTAN LA ‘DIS DON DAM PA BSTAN NO,,

It is stated that we will attain enlightenment if we take delight in hearing descriptions of things like how all of these existing entities are devoid of any nature of their own.  And so whereas the previous lines were in explanation of deceptive reality, these are elucidating ultimate reality.


[2572]
KHAMS NI SA’I KHAMS LA SOGS PA’O,,

The Tibetan word kam in the quotation here—[which can refer to categories or to the elements that compose all physical things]—is a reference to the element of earth and so on.


[2573]
SKYE MCHED NI GZUGS SGRA SOGS SO,,

And then when it says “doors of sense,” it’s referring to things like visible form, and sound.


[2574]
DE’I PHYIR KUN RDZOB BTAGS PA TZAM DANG RANG BZHIN MED PA’I DON DAM BDEN PA SHES PAS DBEN PA RNAMS LA THAR PA LTA GA LA YOD, DE’I PHYIR RNAM PAR SHES PA TZAM DU SMRA BA DE DAG NI LAM GOL PAR ZHUGS PA KHO NA’O,,

And so if people are devoid of any understanding of the reality where things are only imputed, only deceptive; and of the reality which is ultimate, where things have no nature of their own, how then could they ever attain freedom?  As such, we would have to say that those who profess that everything is nothing more than consciousness have with absolute certainty walked onto a mistaken path.


[2575]
‘DIR THA SNYAD KYI BDEN PA BSTAN PA NI THABS SU GYUR PA STE, TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI RGYAL PO LAS,
,YI GE MED PA’I CHOS LA NI,
,NYAN PA GANG DANG STON PA GANG,
,’GYUR PA MED LA SGRO BTAGS PAS,
,’ON KYANG NYAN ZHING STON PA YIN,

When we refer to a “nominal” reality here, this is what we call “method.”  As the King of Concentration puts it,

	Whatever listening
	Or teaching we may
	Ever accomplish

	With the dharma which
	Itself lacks all letters

	Is only imputed
	Upon things which
	Cannot ever change;

	And yet still
	We can listen,
	And still we can teach.


[2576]
ZHES GSUNGS TE, RKANG PA DANG PO GNYIS KYIS NI DE DAG DON DAM PAR MED PAR BSTAN NO, ,DON DAM PAR YI GE MED PA DE LA LA SGRO BTAGS PA STE RTOG PAS BTAGS NAS NYAN PA DANG ‘CHAD DO ZHES PA’O,,

The first two lines [in the Tibetan here, first five lines in the English] are indicating that these things do not exist in any ultimate way.  And then we impute—which is to say, make up in our mind—some number of those things which are, ultimately speaking, beyond any letters, and thus come up with the acts of listening and of explaining.


[2577]
YI GE’I SKAD DOD AAKshA RA ZHES PA YI GE DANG ‘GYUR PA MED PA GNYIS KA LA ‘JUG KYANG ‘DIR YI GE MED LA ZHES BSGYUR NA BDE’O,,

The original Sanskrit term for “letter” here is akshara, which can connote either “letter” or “immutable.”  The translation here though works better if we read it as “lacking letters.”


[2578]
SGRO BTAGS PA NI MED PA LA YOD PA DANG, MA YIN PA LA YIN ZHES PA LTA BU LA YANG MANG DU BSHAD MOD KYANG, DE KHO NAR MI GZUNG GI SPYIR RTOG PAS BTAGS NAS ‘JOG PA LA YANG BYA’O,,

Now of course we see many explanations of how the term used for “impute” here can refer to saying that something exists when in fact it does not; of saying that something is one way or the other when in fact it is not.  This though is not the only way of taking the term; and it can also be explained as connoting something which is merely a creation of our thoughts.


[2579]
THA SNYAD KYI BDEN PA KHO NA LA GNAS TE [f. 186b] DON DAM PA STON LA, DE LAS KYANG DON DAM PA KHONG DU CHUD PA LAS DON DAM PA MYANG NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA ‘THOB STE,

It is only by residing in nominal reality that we can teach the ultimate; and it is by coming to a grasp of the ultimate that we can achieve the ultimate, in the form of nirvana.


[2580]
RTZA SHE LAS,
,THA SNYAD LA NI MA BRTEN PAR,
,DAM PA’I DON NI BSTAN MI NUS,
,DAM PA’I DON NI MA RTOGS PAR,
,MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA THOB MI ‘GYUR,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

As Wisdom puts it,

Without relying on the nominal,
We could never teach the ultimate.

Without realizing the ultimate,
We could never attain nirvana.



Denying the dominated
is not to deny the world

[2581]
BZHI PA NI,

With this we have reached our fourth step from above: showing that denying dominated entities and denying the verbiage of the world are not equivalent.


[2582]
GAL TE KHYOD KYIS DE SKAD DU KHO BO CAG LA SHIN TU LTOS PA MED PAR SMRA NA, DA NI NGED CAG KYANG KHYED LA BZOD PA MI BYED DE, GAL TE BDAG NYID GZHAN GYI PHYOGS SUN ‘BYIN PA TZAM LA MKHAS PAR MNGON PAR BYED CING, RIGS PA’I ‘THAD PAS MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I NGO BO SEL BAR BYED NA, ‘O NA DA NI BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA SOGS ‘GOG PA’I ‘THAD PA KHO NAS, MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR KHYOD LA GRAGS PA’I KUN RDZOB SEL BAR BYED DO ZHE NA,

And so suppose someone comes now with the following response—

You have said things about us in those words which have nothing to do with the situation.  And so now we can no longer be so patient with you.  So suppose it is the case that a person starts to look like they are a master, just because they can attack the positions that someone else holds.  But you are just trying to disprove the essential nature of dominated entities, something which does exist through a nature of its own, reasoning which is not itself rational.  What we will do now then is just to show that it is correct to deny that things could grow either from themselves or from other things; and with nothing more than that, we will be able to disprove the kind of deceptive reality that you speak about—for in the end it is illogical.


[2583]
GAL TE KHYOD THOG MA MED PA’I DUS NAS DKA’ BA BRGYA PHRAG GIS BSAGS PA’I NOR GYI TSOGS ‘PHROG PA PO LA, MDZA’ BO’I ZOL GYIS DUG BCAS KYI ZAS BYIN NAS SLAR PHROGS PAS

In reply, we can say that you are like a person who has been accumulating wealth through thousands of difficult efforts, for a period of time that has no beginning.  And then someone comes along and steals it.  In response, you pretend to be their friend, and feed them a nice meal laced with poison—which allows you to steal your things back again.


[2584]
DGA’ BA BZHIN DU, KHO BO CAG GIS GZHAN DBANG LA BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA’I YUL PHROGS PAS PHAN BTAGS PA NA DE’I LAN DU KHO BO CAG LA GNOD PA BYAS PAS KHYOD DGA’ ZHING RANGS PAR ‘GYUR NA ‘GYUR LA RAG STE, KHO BO CAG NI MNGON PAR MTHO ZHING DAG PA NYID DU ‘GYUR RO,,

And because of that you feel quite pleased with yourself.  Now what we have done is to steal away from you the object that you were holding as dominated entities that exist in reality.  By doing so, we were only helping you.  In response, you tried to hurt us, enjoying—delighting in—the process.  But all that you have accomplished is to assure that we will reach to the higher births, and to absolute purity.


	[2585]
[VI.81]
Na saṃvṛtiś cāpi mayābhyupetā
yathā tvayeṣṭaṃ paratantra rūpam,
Lokānurodhāt tvasatītyam īṣāṃ
satīti kāryārtham ahaṃ bravīmi.

,JI LTAR KHYOD KYIS GZHAN DBANG DNGOS ‘DOD LTAR,
,KUN RDZOB KYANG NI BDAG GIS KHAS MA BLANGS,
,’BRAS PHYIR ‘DI DAG MED KYANG YOD DO ZHES,
,’JIG RTEN NGOR BYAS BDAG NI SMRA BAR BYED,

	You say that
	Dominated entities
	Are real;

	And then when
	You agree to it,
	
	A deceptive reality
	Is not something
	We can accept.

		It is meant
		For a particular effect—

		That all these things
		Are not things
		Which exist.

		Nonetheless,
		What we say is
		That they exist,

		To the appearances
		Of the world.


[2586]
‘DI LTAR JI LTAR SEMS TZAM PA KHYOD KYIS GZHAN DBANG DNGOS POR TE NGO BOS GRUB PA, SUM CU PA LAS, DE MA MTHONG BAR DE MI MTHONG ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR ‘PHAGS PA’I YE SHES KYIS THUGS SU CHUD PAR BYAS [f. 187a] PA ZHIG GI RANG DBANG DU BYAS NAS, RANG LUGS KYIS YOD DO ZHES ‘DOD PA DE LTAR KUN RDZOB KYANG NI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR BDAG GIS KHAS MA BLANGS SO,,

And here’s how that happens.  You followers of the Mind Only say that dominated entities are real things; which is to say, that they exist through some essential nature of their own.  As the Thirty Verses puts it, “It’s something you fail to see, being something that cannot be seen.”  That is, you are saying that there is something which is comprehended by the wisdom of a realized being which has some independent nature of its own.  And then when you say that your own system says that something does exist, and you agree to it, you are talking about a deceptive reality which could exist through some nature of its own.  This is not something though which we can accept.


[2587]
‘O NA CI ZHE NA, PHUNG PO LA SOGS PA ‘DI DAG RANG BZHIN GYIS MED KYANG, ‘JIG RTEN KHO NA LAS GRAGS PAR ‘GYUR BAS YOD DO ZHES ‘JIG RTEN GYI NGO KHO NAR BYAS NAS BDAG GIS NI SMRA BAR BYED DO,,

And what then is our own position?  We say that all these things—the heaps and the rest—are not things which exist through some nature of their own.  Nonetheless, they are things which are spoken of—if only in the everyday world.  And so what we say is that they do exist, but only to the appearances of normal people in the world.


[2588]
‘DIR KUN RDZOB PA’I PHUNG SOGS ‘JIG RTEN THA SNYAD KYI NGOR ‘JOG PA LA TSUL GNYIS TE, DBU MA PA RANG GIS KUN RDZOB TU ‘JOG PA NI THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MA’I NGOR KHAS LEN GYI RIGS NGOR MI ‘JOG GO

Now there are two different manners in which deceptive objects such as the heaps can be established in a nominal way: to the perceptions of the world.  Those of the Middle Way school would say that they accept things which are established as existing in a deceptive way as they appear to nominal perceptions which are accurate; they would not though say that they are established relative to perceptions resulting from logic.


[2589]
,SKABS ‘GAR DGOS PA’I DBANG GIS PHUNG SOGS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR ‘JOG PA NI, RANG LUGS LA MI ‘DOD KYI GZHAN NGO KHO NAR KHAS LEN PAS DE GNYIS ‘GOG PA MI MTSUNGS SO,,

There are a few specific occasions upon which the heaps and so forth are—by necessity—established as things which exist through some nature of their own.  This is not to say that these things are accepted within our own system, but rather accepted only relative to the belief of others.  As such, the ways in which we deny the two are not equivalent.


[2590]
GZHAN NGOR DE LTAR KHAS LEN PA NI ‘BRAS BU STE DGOS PA’I PHYIR YIN LA, DE YANG GDUL BYA DE GRUB MTHA’ NGAN PA GZHAN LAS LDOG PA DANG, RIM GYIS DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA’I THABS YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Accepting these things in the eyes of those others is something meant for a certain effect; which is to say, to satisfy a certain need.  In fact it is meant as a means of turning disciples away from these other, defective systems of thought and bringing them, gradually, to the means of realizing suchness.


[2591]
DES NA GZHUNG DES RNAM GZHAG THAMS CAD GZHAN NGOR BYED KYI, RANG LUGS LA MI BYED PA’I DON GTAN MIN PA NI, ‘DI’I SHES BYED KYI LUNG DRANGS PA NYID KYIS SHES SO,,

As such, we can say that everything such classics present is only intended for the perceptions of the other side.  It is not at all that we would present points that don’t at all represent our own system.  This is something that can be understood by the very supporting citations we quote.


[2592]
LUNG NI SDOM PA GSUM BSTAN PA LAS, ‘JIG RTEN NGA DANG LHAN CIG RTZOD KYI, NGA NI ‘JIG RTEN DANG MI RTZOD DE, GANG ‘JIG RTEN NA YOD PAR ‘DOD PA DE NI NGAS KYANG YOD PAR BZHED DO, ,GANG ‘JIG RTEN NA MED PAR ‘DOD PA DE NI NGA YANG MED PAR BZHED DO, ZHES [f. 187b] GSUNGS PA’O,,

And what are such citations?  As A Presentation of the Three Vows puts it,

The world may dispute with me, but I have no dispute with the world.  Whatever the world says exists, I also agree exists.  Whatever the world says does not exist, I also agree does not.


[2593]
‘DI NI STONG NYID BDUN CU PA LAS,
,GNAS PA’AM SKYE ‘JIG YOD MED DAM,
,DMAN PA’AM MNYAM PA’AM KHYAD PAR CAN,
,SANGS RGYAS ‘JIG RTEN BSNYAD DBANG GIS,
,GSUNGS KYIS YANG DAG DBANG GIS MIN,

The Seventy Verses on Emptiness puts it this way—

	Whether it’s staying,
	Or starting or stopping;

	Whether it’s existing
	Or not existing;

	Whether it’s lower,
	Or equal, or exceptional,

	All are spoken of
	By the Buddhas using
	The wording of the world—

	Never is it independently.


[2594]
ZHES YOD MED LA SOGS PAR ‘JOG PA THAMS CAD ‘JIG RTEN NA JI LTAR GRAGS PA’I THA SNYAD KYI DBANG GIS ‘JOG PAR GSUNGS PA’I DON NO,,

What these lines are saying is that the Buddhas speak in terms of the language that is common in the everyday world, whenever they are describing whether something exists or not, or anything else of the like.


	[2595]
[VI.82]
Skandhān samutsṛjya śiva praveśe
yathārhatāṃ nāsti tathaiva na syāt,
Lokasya cet tadvad imāṃ satīti
brūyām ahaṃ naiva hi lokato’pi.

,JI LTAR PHUNG PO SPANGS NAS ZHIR ZHUGS PA,
,DGRA BCOM RNAMS LA YOD PA MIN DE LTAR,
,’JIG RTEN LA YANG MED NA DE BZHIN ‘DI,
,’JIG RTEN LAS KYANG YOD CES BDAG MI SMRA,

	None exists
	For those who reside
	In peace, where
	
	Enemy destroyers
	Have eliminated
	The heaps.

	Suppose that,
	In a similar way,

	There were none
	In the general
	World as well.

	I do not say that
	It would be similar;	

	That there could exist
	One like this
	For the world.


[2596]
JI STE KUN RDZOB ‘DI JI LTAR DGRA BCOM PA PHUNG PO SPANGS NAS LHAG MED KYI ZHI BA’I DBYINGS SU ZHUGS PA RNAMS LA, KUN RDZOB THAMS CAD YOD PA MIN PA DE LTAR DU GAL TE ‘JIG RTEN LA YANG KUN RDZOB ‘DI MED NA, LHAG MED PA DE BZHIN DU KUN RDZOB PA ‘DI ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KYI NGO LA LTOS NAS KYANG YOD CES BDAG MI SMRA’O,,

None of all the deceptive objects there may be in the world exists, for those who reside in the realm of peace with nothing left, where these enemy destroyers have eliminated the heaps.  And so suppose that, in a similar way, in the general world as well there were no deceptive reality.  I do not say that it would be similar to that case where nothing remains; that is, I do not say that there could then exist any deceptive reality like this which presented itself to the nominal perceptions of the world.


[2597]
DE’I PHYIR GZHAN ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD LA RAG LAS PA NYID KYI SGO NAS BDAG GIS KUN RDZOB KHAS BLANGS KYI, ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD LA MA LTOS PAR RANG DBANG DU KHAS BLANGS PA NI MIN NO,,

What this is saying then is that “I accept deceptive reality precisely through the common parlance of these others: of those of the world.  It is not though the case that I would accept it independently, without relying upon the expressions of the world.”


	[2598]
[VI.83]
Niṣidhyatāṃ lokata eva caiṣā
na lokabādhā bhavato yadi syāt,
Loko bhavāṃś ceha vivādam etu
paścād balīyāṃsam ahaṃ śrayiṣye.

,GAL TE KHYOD LA ‘JIG RTEN MI GNOD NA,
,’JIG RTEN NYID LTOS ‘DI NI DGAG PAR GYIS,
,KHYOD DANG ‘JIG RTEN ‘DIR NI RTZOD KYIS {%GYIS} DANG,
,PHYI NAS STOBS LDAN BDAG GIS BRTEN PAR BYA,

		If the world
		Is not something
		That could call your
		Ideas into question,

		Then you can
		Go ahead and deny it
		Relative to
		The world itself.

		You and the world
Can go ahead
And argue with
Each other on this.

Once you are done,
I will put my support
Behind the stronger.


[2598]
THOG MAR ‘JIG RTEN KHO NAS KHAS BLANGS PA YIN TE, DE’I PHYIR GANG GIS KHAS BLANGS PA DE KHO NA LA LTOS NAS SEL BAR NUS PAS NA BSAL BAR ‘OS PA YIN TE, GZHAN DBU MA PA LA LTOS NAS NI MA YIN NO ZHES BSHAD PA

What this is saying is that, to start off, things are accepted only by the world.  As such, when we are denying a certain idea we can only do so dependent upon what someone has accepted as the case; this then becomes something worthy of denial.  It is not though that we are taking some kind of position relative to what those of the Middle Way are asserting.


[2599]
KHO BO CAG NI KUN RDZOB ‘KHRUL PA’I SNANG BA RANG RGYUD LA BZLOG PA’I PHYIR SHIN TU TSEGS CHE BAS LAM SGOM PA LA GNAS PAR ‘GYUR GYI, GAL TE KHYOD LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS MI GNOD NA, KHYOD KYIS ‘JIG RTEN NYID LA LTOS NAS KUN RDZOB ‘DI NI DGAG PAR GYIS SHIG ,DE KHYOD KYI [f. 188a] RIGS PAS ‘GOG NUS NA NGAS KYANG KHYOD LA STONGS GDAB PA STE GROGS BYA’O,,

We for our part have kept up our practice of the path with incredibly great effort, in order to put a stop to the mistaken appearance of deceptive reality within our own minds.  If what the world says is not something that could call your ideas into question, then you can go ahead and deny this deceptive reality relative to the world itself.  If you find that this is something that you can deny with your particular reasoning, then I will gladly “join hands with you”—meaning, I will accompany you.


[2600]
‘JIG RTEN GYIS NI GNOD PA YANG YIN TE, DE’I PHYIR KHO BO CAG KHYOD KYI GROGS MI BYED PAR BTANG SNYOMS SU GNAS PAR BYA’O,,

The fact though is that the world as well contradicts your ideas; and so actually I will refuse to accompany you—I will leave you as you are.


[2601]
KHYOD DANG ‘JIG RTEN PA GNYIS ‘DIR NI RTZOD PA GYIS SHIG DANG, BRTZAD PA’I PHYI NAS GANG STOBS DANG LDAN PA DE LA BDAG GIS BRTEN PAR BYA’O,,

And so both you and the world can go ahead and argue with each other on this.  Once you are both done fighting, I will put my support behind whichever of you has proved to be the stronger.


[2602]
DE LA KHYOD RGYAL NA NI KHO BO CAG DE ‘DOD PAS KHYOD LA BRTEN PAR BYA’O,,

Which is to say, if you manage to emerge victorious, then all of us will give you our support.


[2603]
‘ON TE KHYOD ‘JIG RTEN GYIS PHAM PAR BYAS NA NI, SHIN TU STOBS DANG LDAN PA’I ‘JIG RTEN LA BRTEN PAR BYA’O,,

If however it turns out though that the world defeats you, we will put our support behind the world, which has proven to be so extremely strong.


[2604]
DE LTAR NA PHYI ROL MED PA LA THA SNYAD PA’I TSAD MAS GNOD PAS PHYI ROL MED PAR SGRUB MI NUS SO,,

As such, nominal forms of accurate perception draw into question the idea that there exist no outer objects; as such, you are unable to prove the idea that no such objects exist.


[2605]
‘O NA SEMS TZAM PAS RDUL CHA MED MED PAS DE BSAGS PA’I PHYI DON ‘GOG PA’I RIGS PAS, PHYOGS KYI CHA MED KYI PHYI DON MI KHEGS SO SNYAM NA, 

Now the following thought might occur to you—

Well, but it’s not the case that followers of the Mind Only are denying outer objects that have no sides to them, by using reasoning that denies that there are any outer objects that are composed of partless particles.


[2606]
DE DAG TSAD MAS MA KHEGS PAR MA SMRA’I DE KHEGS KYANG PHYI ROL GYI DON MED MI DGOS SO,,

Even if they were not to assert that those could not be denied by an accurate perception, it would not have to be the case that there were no outer objects.


[2607]
‘DIS NI SHES PA DUS KYI CHA MED DANG DE ‘THUD PA’I RGYUN KHEGS KYANG SHES PA MI KHEGS PA YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

You can also use this to understand how—even if we deny partless instants of time for the stream of consciousness, and thus deny any stream composed of such snippets of consciousness tied together—we are not thereby denying consciousness in general.


[2608]
GZHAN GYI LUGS KYIS NI PHYI ROL CHA MED KHEGS NA SNANG BA LA MA ‘KHRUL BA’I DBANG SHES KHEGS, DBANG SHES ‘KHRUL PAS DON ‘JOG MI NUS PAS PHYI DON KHEGS SO SNYAM DU BSAMS SO,,

According to the other side here, you deny an awareness of the senses which is unmistaken towards what appears to it, when you deny that outside objects have no sides to them.  A sense awareness which is mistaken is not capable of establishing its object; and so one would think that outer objects had been denied.


[2609]
‘DIR NI DBANG SHES ‘KHRUL PAS GZHAL BYA BDEN PA ‘JOG MI NUS KYANG, GZHAL BYA BRDZUN PA ‘JOG PA LA DE GROGS SU SONG NGO SNYAM DU DGONGS SO,,

Here we can say that a sense awareness which is mistaken cannot establish reality as the object under its consideration.  And the thinking here is that—when we seek to establish an object of consideration which is deceptive—it would have to serve in an assisting role.


[2610]
‘DI NYID ‘PHAGS PA LHA YANG BZHED DE BRGYA PA LAS,
,GCIG YOD [f. 188b] GCIG MED CES BYA BA,
,DE NYID MIN ‘JIG RTEN PA’ANG MIN,
,ZHES DON SHES YOD MED ‘BYED PA BDEN GNYIS GANG GI YANG RNAM GZHAG MIN PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This very point is something that Master Aryadeva also agrees to; as the 400 Verses puts it,

Saying that one is there,
Or that one is not there,

Is not with that particular one;
Nor with that of the world.


[2611]
DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR ‘BYED PA KLU’I ZHABS KYI BZHED PA YANG MA YIN NO,,

We can say thus that making the distinction in this way is not the position of the great Nagarjuna either.



“Only” is not meant
to deny outer objects

[2612]
GSUM PA LA GSUM, SA BCU PA LAS, SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS PA BSHAD PA, PHYI ROL DANG NANG GI SEMS GNYIS YOD MED MTSUNGS PAR BSTAN PA, LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS, SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS PA BSHAD PA’O,,

Which brings us to our third part from above: a demonstration that the word “only” in the expression “Mind Only” is not meant to deny outer objects.  We proceed in three steps: an explanation of how the intent of the term “mind only” is described in The Ten Levels; a demonstration that outside objects, and the inner mind, are equivalent in either existing or not existing; and finally an explanation of how the intent of “mind only” is described in A Journey to Langka.


[2613]
DANG PO LA GSUM, TZAM GYI SGRAS PHYI ROL MI ‘GOG PA SA BCU PA’I LUNG GIS BSGRUB PA, DON DE NYID MDO GZHAN GYIS KYANG BSGRUB PA, TZAM GYI SGRAS SEMS GTZO BO NYID DU BSGRUB PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

We’ll cover the first of these three in another three of its own: showing how a citation from The Ten Levels supports the idea that the word “only” is not meant to deny outer objects; demonstrating how this very same point is made in other sutras as well; and establishing that the intent of the word “only” is to say only that the mind is the primary thing.  Here is the first of these.


[2614]
GAL TE DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I ‘THAD PA STE RIGS PAS GRUB PA DANG BRAL YANG, ‘JIG RTEN PA’I GNOD PAS ‘JIGS NAS KHYOD KYIS KUN RDZOB KHAS BLANGS NA NI, LUNG GI GNOD PAS ‘JIGS PAS SEMS TZAM DU YANG KHAS BLANG DGOS TE, SA BCU PA LAS, DE ‘DI SNYAM DU SEMS TE, ‘DI LTAR KHAMS GSUM PO ‘DI NI SEMS TZAM STE, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O ZHE NA,

And so suppose you come and say the following—

I was bereft of the correctness of learning to examine suchness; which is to say, I felt I was without any solid proof for it.  Fearing then that the ideas of the world would harm my position, I accepted the idea of a deceptive reality.  And when I did that, I feared further that I would be disproven by scripture; and so I found myself having to accept the ideas of the Mind Only.  Here I found support from The Ten Levels, where it says: “And then one comes to the following thoughts, saying to oneself, ‘All three of the realms of existence are only the mind.”


[2615]
BRJOD PA RGYAL BA’I GSUNG GI NOR BU AANDA RNYIL LAS SBYAR BA’I MDO SDE’I SA GZHI BSTAR BA LA, AANDA RNYIL YIN PA DE MA SHES PAR RNAM PAR SHES PA DNGOS POR SMRA BA’I CHU’I RNAM PAR YONGS SU ‘GYUR BAR ‘KHRUL BA KHYOD NI,

And yet these statements, the jewel of the speech of the Victorious Ones, are like a vast ground of the sutras, made out of pure sapphire and glistening in light.  You on your side fail to recognize it as the sapphire, and so you have bathed it in the chemical of the Functionalists, saying that things are consciousness, and mistaking what comes out of the transformation wrought by the chemical wash.


[2616]
RNAM PAR SHES PA DNGOS POR SMRA BA’I CHU TZAM ZHIG BCU BAR ‘DOD PAS, RANG GI BLO GROS KYI BUM PA SO MA BTANG BA BSHAL ZHING BSNYUGS NAS DUM BU RNAM PA BRGYAR KLOG PA [f. 189a] NA, DE’I RANG BZHIN SHES PA RNAMS KYI BZHAD GAD DU BYA BA NYID DU ‘GYUR BAR BYED PA YIN NO,,

And so you hope to whitewash everything with this liquid chemical of consciousness according to the Functionalists.  To do so, you take the vessel of your wisdom—a vessel which remains unfired clay—and pour the liquid into the brim and end up with the pot breaking into a hundred shards.  And all you’ve managed to do is to become a laughing stock for those who really understand the nature of these things.


[2617]
MDO’I DGONGS PA ‘DI NI JI LTAR KHYOD KYI BLO LA SNANG BA DE LTAR MA YIN NO,,

The fact is that the true intent of the sutra is not at all the way that it appeared to be, in your minds.


	[2618]
[VI.84]
Vijñāna mātraṃ tribhavaṃ paraiti
yad bodhisattvo ‘bhimukho ‘bhimukhyām,
Nityātma kartṛ pratiṣedha bodhāt
prapadyate kartṛ sa citta mātram.

,MNGON GYUR MNGON PHYOGS BYANG CHUB
SEMS DPA’ YIS,
,SRID GSUM RNAM SHES TZAM DU GANG RTOGS PA,
,RTAG BDAG BYED PO BKAG PA RTOGS PHYIR DES,
,BYED PA PO NI SEMS TZAM YIN PAR RTOGS,

		A bodhisattva
		Headed towards
		The manifestation

		Comes to the realization
		That these three
		Worlds of pain
		Are nothing but the mind.

		What this means
		For them is that
		They have blocked
		
The idea of an
		Unchanging self
		As the creator,

		And come to
		The realization.


[2619]
YANG ‘DIR MDO’I DON CI YIN ZHE NA,

“Well then,” you may ask.  “Just what then is the real meaning of this sutra?”


[2620]
DE’I PHYIR BSHAD PA, SA DRUG PA MNGON DU GYUR PA CHOS DBYINGS LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PA’I BYANG CHUB THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES LA SEMS PA DE LA YOD PAS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ YIS,

It’s to answer that question that we see this explanation.  Let’s consider a bodhisattva—which is to say, a person who is of the type that has an intention to reach the state of enlightenment, or the knowledge of all things—and who is headed towards the realm of all things with the manifestation of the sixth level.


[2621]
SRID PA KHAMS GSUM RNAM SHES SEMS TZAM DU RTOGS PAR GSUNGS PA GANG YIN PA DES NI, BDAG RTAG PA BYED PA PO BKAG NAS, KUN RDZOB SEMS TZAM ZHIG KHO NA BYED PA PO YIN PAR RTOGS PA’I PHYIR,

It certainly is the case that it was stated that this person has come to the realization that this world of pain—the three realms of suffering—are nothing but the mind.  But what this means for them is that they have blocked the idea of an unchanging self as the creator; and have come to the realization that it is the mind only which is the sole creator of deceptive reality.


[2622]
‘JIG RTEN GYI BYED PA PO NI BYANG SEMS DES SEMS TZAM ZHIG YIN PAR RTOGS TE,

As such, this kind of bodhisattva has come to the realization that the creator of the world was the mind alone.


[2623]
SA BCU PA LAS, LUGS SU BYUNG BA’I RNAM PAR RTEN CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA LA RAB TU RTOG GO ,DE LTAR NA SDUG BSNGAL GYI PHUNG PO SDUG BSNGAL GYI LJON PA BYED PA PO DANG, TSOR BA PO MED PA ‘BA’ ZHIG PO ‘DI MNGON PAR ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM MO,,

The way that The Ten Levels puts it, in great detail, is as follows:

They have a great understanding of all it is that occurs in dependence and relationship, in the forward order of this progression.  And so they think to themselves, “The great tree of this heap of suffering, of pain, had no maker; and there is no one to feel it either.  This is all there is; this is how this came to be.”


[2624]
DE ‘DI SNYAM DU SEMS TE, BYED PA PO LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PAS LAS RNAMS YOD PAR GYUR TO,,

And then this thought occurs to them: “All these kinds of karma came about through the strong belief in some creator.”


[2625]
GANG NA BYED PA PO MED PA DE NA DON DAM PAR LAS KYANG MI DMIGS SNYAM MO,,

“And where there is no creator, then neither is there—in an ultimate sense—any karma.”


[2626]
DE ‘DI SNYAM DU SEMS TE, KHAMS GSUM PA ‘DI NI SEMS TZAM STE, SRID PA’I LAN LAG BCU GNYIS PO GANG DAG DE BZHIN GSHEGS PAS RAB TU PHYE STE BKA’ STZAL PA DE DAG THAMS CAD KYANG SEMS GCIG LA BRTEN PA DAG GO ZHES RGYA CHER GSUNGS SO,,

And they think to themselves, “All three of these realms of existence are only the mind.  And all of the twelve links of suffering existence which the One Thus Gone enumerated in his holy speech—each and every one of them—is something that relies upon the one mind.”


[2627]
MDO DES NI BYED PA PO DANG TSOR BA PO [f. 189b] MED PA’I ‘BA’ ZHIG PA ‘GRUB PA DANG, SEMS TZAM GYI DON BSHAD PA NA YAN LAG BCU GNYIS SEMS GCIG LA BRTEN PAR GSUNGS PAS,

These lines of the sutra are establishing a singularity where there is no agent, and no one who has feelings.  And when it gets into explaining the meaning of “mind only,” it states that the twelve links of dependence depend upon the one thing, mind.


[2628]
MDO ‘DI’I TZAM GYI SGRAS DON MI ‘GOG PA DANG, SEMS LAS GZHAN PA’I BYED PA PO ‘GOG PA YIN NO,,

When this sutra uses the word “only” then, it is not meant to deny certain objects.  Rather, it is denying any creator other than the mind.


[2629]
‘DI’I PHYOGS SNGA MA NI THEG BSDUS LAS, DE LA LUNG NI BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS SA BCU PA LAS, ‘DI LTA STE, KHAMS GSUM PO ‘DI NI SEMS TZAM MO ZHES PA DANG, ZHES RNAM RIG TZAM DU DPOG PA LA LUNG RIGS GNYIS GSUNGS PA’I LUNG DE LA MDZAD CING,

The opponent here is utilizing a line from A Compendium of the Greater Way, where it says: “As far as scriptural authority for this, The Ten Levels says, ‘This is how it is: these three realms of existence are only the mind’.”  That is, they are using this as the scriptural source for both scripture & reasoning for concluding that everything is only mental.


[2630]
NYI SHU PA’I RANG ‘GREL LAS KYANG, LUNG DE DRANGS SHING SEMS ZHES PA MTSUNGS LDAN DANG BCAS PA LA DGONGS SHING, TZAM SMOS PAS DON ‘GOG PAR BSHAD DO,,

The autocommentary to The Twenty Verses cites the same lines of the sutra, and says that the word “mind” here is intended to include those items which share a mental link with main mind.  And then it states that the term “only” here is meant to deny the object.


[2631]
‘DI SNGAR LTAR ‘GOG PA NI SNGON DU LEGS LDAN GYIS MDZAD LA, DE NAS ZLA BAS KYANG MDZAD DO,,

Making the denial as we described it before was done previously by Master Bhavaviveka; and then afterwards Master Chandrakirti did the same.



How others sutras
make the same point

[2632]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second step from above: demonstrating how this very same point is made in other sutras as well.


	[2633]
[VI.85]
Uktaṃ cāto dhīmatāṃ dhī vivṛddhyai
sarva jñenottuṅgatīrthyādribhedi,
Sūtre tasminn ārya Laṃkāvatāre
sandhyucchittau vāṅmayaṃ vajram etat.

,DE PHYIR BLO LDAN BLO NI ‘PHEL BYA’I PHYIR,
,LANG KAR GSHEGS MDO DE LAS KUN MKHYEN GYIS,
,MU STEGS SPO MTHON RI ‘JOMS NGAG RANG BZHIN,
,RDO RJE ‘DI NI DGONGS PA BCAD PHYIR GSUNGS,

		Thus it is
		The Journey to Langka
		Speaks of the diamond weapon

		Consisting of speech
		Used by the Omniscient One
		To smash down
		The lofty summit
		
		Of the mountain
		Of the River Schools.

		This is the one
		Described in order
		To carve out
		The real intent.		


[2634]
SEMS TZAM GYI TZAM GYI SGRAS BYED PA PO GZHAN ‘GOG PA SA BCU PA’I DON DU BSHAD NAS, DON ‘DI NYID MDO GZHAN GYIS KYANG BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Now that we have explained how the point of The Ten Levels here is to indicate how the word “only” in the expression “mind only” is meant to deny any other creator, we will show how this very same point is indicated by other sutras as well.


[2635]
TZAM GYI SGRAS BYED PA PO GZHAN ‘GOG PA SA BCU PA’I DON YIN PA DE’I PHYIR, DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS NUS PA’I BLO LDAN GYI BLO NI ‘PHEL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, LANG KAR GSHEGS PA’I MDO DE LAS KUN MKHYEN GYIS MU STEGS PA’I RGYUD KYI BDAG DANG GTZO BO SOGS ‘JIG RTEN GYI BYED PA POR ‘DOD PA’I LTA BA NGAN PA’I RI BO SPO MTHON PO ‘JOMS PA’I NGAG GI RANG BZHIN GYI RDO RJE

And so we could put it this way.  The actual meaning of those lines from The Ten Levels is to say that the word “only” is intended to deny that there is any other creator.  Thus it is the Journey to Langka—in order to augment the understanding of those intelligent ones who are capable of grasping suchness—speaks of the diamond weapon (consisting of speech itself) used by the Omniscient One to smash down the lofty summit of the mountain of terrible viewpoints, in the minds of those of the River Schools, where one holds that a Divine Self or Supreme Being or something of the like was the one who created the world.


[2636]
‘OG NAS ‘BYUNG BA ‘DI NI, MDO GZHAN DU SEMS TZAM ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS PA [f. 190a] GCAD PA’I PHYIR DU STON PAS GSUNGS SO,,

This diamond is the one that we find in the reference following; it was described by the Teacher in order to carve out the real intent of the term “mind only” as mentioned in other sutras.


[2637]
RDO RJE NI,
,GANG ZAG RGYUN DANG PHUNG PO DANG,
,DE BZHIN RKYEN DANG RDUL DAG DANG,
,GTZO BO DBANG PHYUG BYED PO RNAMS,
,SEMS TZAM DU NI NGAS BSHAD DO,
ZHES LANG GSHEGS LAS GSUNGS TE,

And so here is the “diamond” mentioned in the Journey to Langka:

	All these things—
	The person, the stream,
	The heaps, and so too
	The factors, the particles,
	The Supreme Being,
	The Lord of Power,
	And the Creator—

	Are all of them, I say,
	Only the mind itself.


[2638]
GANG ZAG NAS DBANG PHYUG BYED PA POR SMRA BA RNAMS KYI BYED PA PO NI, DE RNAMS MIN GYI SEMS TZAM ZHIG BYED PA POR NGA SMRA’O, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that all the creators mentioned in these lines from the word “the person” up to “the Lord of Power and the Creator” are in fact not creators; and “What I say is that the real creator is the mind only.”


	[2639]
[VI.86]
Tasmin tasmin varṇitāḥ śāstra ete
tīrthyair yuktyā pudgalādyā yathāsvam,
Kartṛ tvenāpaśyatā tān jinena
lokasyoktaṃ citta mātraṃ tu kartṛ.

,JI BZHIN RANG GI BSTAN BCOS DE DE LAS,
,MU STEGS RNAMS KYIS GANG ZAG SOGS DE DAG,
,SMRAS PA DE DAG BYED POR MA GZIGS NAS,
,RGYAL BAS SEMS TZAM ‘JIG RTEN BYED POR GSUNGS,

		Look at the way
		The River Schools—

		In this or that
		Of the commentaries
		Of theirs—

		Speak of the person
		And such and such.

		The Victors though
		Do not see these
		As creators,

		And so have stated
		That it is only the mind
		Which is the creator.		


[2640]
MDO ‘DI’I DON DGROL BA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA, JI BZHIN TE JI LTAR RANG RANG GI BSTAN BCOS KYI GRUB PA’I MTHA’ DE DANG DE LAS, MU STEGS RNAMS KYIS GANG ZAG DANG SOGS PAS RGYUN DANG PHUNG PO SOGS BYED PA POR SMRAS PA DE DAG BYED PA POR MA GZIGS NAS, RGYAL BAS SEMS TZAM ZHIG ‘JIG RTEN GYI BYED PA POR GSUNGS SO,,

And so the following is stated, to unravel the intent of these lines from sutra.  Look at the way—the manner—in which the River Schools, in this or that of the commentaries of their respective systems, speak of the person “and such”—which is meant to include a flow or the heaps or such as the creator.  The Victors though do not see these as being creators, and so have stated that it is only the mind which is the creator of the world.


[2641]
RTZA BAR MU STEGS RNAMS KYIS ZHES PA NI PHAL CHE BA LA BSAMS PA STE, CHOS ‘DI PA SANGS RGYAS PA DAG GIS KYANG GANG ZAG DANG, RGYUN LA SOGS PA BYED PA POR BTAGS PA KHO NA’O,,

When the root text here mentions “non-Buddhists,” it is meant only to refer to the majority of the cases.  And that’s because those who belong to these teachings here—the Buddhists themselves—also include those who in sheer imagination impute creatorship upon things like the person, or the flow.


[2642]
YANG NA GANG ZAG SOGS BYED PA POR RTOG PA DE DAG KYANG CHOS ‘DI PA SANGS RGYAS PA MA YIN TE, MU STEGS LTAR SANGS RGYAS KYI BSTAN PA’I DON PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR MA RTOGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We can also say that those who imagine that the person and so forth could be the creator here could never be those of “this” school—referring to the Buddhists.  And that’s because, like those of the River Schools, they would have to fail to grasp the meaning of the teachings of the Buddha in an unmistaken way.


[2643]
DE’I PHYIR MU STEGS ZHES PA NI KHYAB PAR BYED PA’I TSIG GO

As such, we would then say that the term “follower of the River School” was comprehensive.


[2644]
,RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS KYANG,
,GANG ZAG PHUNG POR SMRA BA YI,
,’JIG RTEN GRANGS CAN ‘UG PHRUG DANG,
,GOS MED BCAS LA GAL TE ZHIG
,YOD MED ‘DAS PA SMRA NA DRIS,

We further see the following lines in the String of Precious Jewels—

Suppose we ask
Those who say
That the person
Is the heaps—

The worldly ones,
The Numerists,
The Children of the Owl,
And those Unclothed—

Whether or not
There could be something
That was beyond existing,
Or not existing.


	[2645]
,DE PHYIR SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS NI,
,BSTAN PA ‘CHI MED YOD MED LAS,
,’DAS [f. 190b] PA ZAB MO ZHES BSTAN PA,
,CHOS KYI KHUD PA YIN ZHES GYIS,

This then is why
We say that it was
The true treasure
Of all teachings

When the Buddhas declared
The deathless and profound
Instruction which states

That everything is beyond
Either existing or not existing.


[2646]
ZHES GANG ZAG DANG PHUNG PO RDZAS SU YOD PAR SMRA BA SOGS LA YOD MED GNYIS KYI MTHA’ DANG BRAL BA SMRA BAR SNANG NA DRIS SHIG DANG, DE’I DON BSHAD RGYU MI ‘ONG NGO,,

What this is saying is that someone could make their appearance to people like those who say that the person and the parts of the person exist in a substantial way, and make the statement that these things are free of the two extremes of existing or not existing, and these people wouldn’t be able to give any explanation of what this means at all.


[2647]
DE’I PHYIR BSTAN PA’I DON YOD MED GNYIS KYI MTHA’ DANG BRAL BA NI, DAM PA’I CHOS KYI KHUD PA STE KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS GZHAN LA MED PAR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG CES GSUNGS SO,,

As such, it’s saying, the meaning of the teaching—that things are free of either extreme, of existing or not existing—is the true treasure of all the teachings.  Which is to say, you should realize that it can be found in no other teaching there is, no matter how special it may be.


[2648]
‘KHOR BA ‘DI NI THOG MA MED PAS ‘DIR SNGAR NGAN RTOG CI ZHIG MA BYUNG PHYIS KYANG CI ZHIG MI ‘BYUNG ZHING, ‘DI LTAR DA LTA NYID DU YANG SPONG BA DKAR PO LA SOGS PA DAG LA PHUNG PO LA SOGS PA RDZAS SU YOD PA BYED PA PO NYID DU STON PA SNANG NGO,,

“This cycle of suffering has no starting point; as such, there is no unsavory idea that has not occurred at some point in time before now; and there is none that will not occur after this, either.  And so even in the present days themselves we see groups like the White Renunciates, who teach that the heaps exist in a substantial way, and that they are the creator of things.”


[2649]
‘DI LA DPE KHA CIG LAS SPONG DKAR PO LA SOGS PA ZHES KYANG ‘BYUNG ZHING, ‘GREL BSHAD KYI ‘GYUR LAS DGE SLONG SKYA BA SING LA SOGS PA ZHES ‘BYUNG LA, DE’I DON GCER BU PA’I DGE SLONG RNAMS LA ‘CHAD DO,,

In some manuscripts, we also see the wording here as “things like the white renunciation”; while there is a translation of the commentary that says it as “the monk named Kyawa Sing” or things of the like.  The meaning of this term is explained as referring to the equivalent of a monk among the Jains.


[2650]
SPONG BA PA NI BSAM GTAN PA’I MING YIN PAS BSAM GTAN PA DKAR PO ZHES PA’I RANG SDE PHUNG PO RDZAS YOD BYED PA POR SMRA BA ZHIG GO

“Renunciate” is another name for a person who meditates frequently; as such, we could say it here as “The White Meditator.”  The point is that it is a group which says the heaps to a person exist substantially, and that they are the creator.



“Only” means “primary”

[2651]
,GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third part from above: establishing that the intent of the word “only” is to say only that the mind is the primary thing.


[2652]
DE LTAR NA RE ZHIG BYED PA PO SEMS LAS GZHAN PA BKAG PAS, TZAM GYI SGRA’I DON BYAS ZIN PA’I PHYIR TZAM GYI SGRAS SHES BYA PHYI ROL GYI DON ‘GOG MI NUS PAR BRJOD NAS, BSHAD TSUL DE LAS RNAM PA GZHAN SEMS GTZO BOR GYUR PAR BSHAD PA LAS KYANG PHYI ROL ‘GOG PA MI SRID PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

And so to this point we have expressed how we deny that the creator could be anything other than the mind; and also finished our treatment of what the term “only” refers to, showing how—as such—this term is unable to deny entities that could ever be outside objects.  Now then we will diverge from that explanation to another, which shows that even if we take the meaning of this term to say that the mind is the main thing, it is still not possible for that to be used to say that there are no outside objects.


	[2653]
[VI.87]
Buddho yadvad buddha tattvo niruktas
tadval lokaś citta mātra pradhānaḥ,
Uktaḥ sūtre cittamātraṃ niṣedho
no rūpasyetīha sūtrārtha evam.

,DE NYID RGYAS LA SANGS RGYAS BSNYAD JI BZHIN,
,DE BZHIN SEMS TZAM GTZOR GYUR ‘JIG RTEN LA,
,MDO LAS SEMS TZAM ZHES [208b] GSUNGS GZUGS NI ‘DIR,
,’GOG PA DE LTAR MDO YI DON MA YIN,

	We refer to those
	Who have expanded
	Their mind
	Into suchness
	As “Buddhas.”

	In the same way,
	It is “mind only”
	In the sense of 
	The main thing.

	This is from
	References in sutra
	Which say that

	“For the world,
	There is only mind [f. 208b].”

	Here it is not the
	Meaning of sutra to be
	Some kind of denial
	Of outer form.


[2654]
JI LTAR DE KHO NA NYID LA BLO RGYAS PA LA SANGS RGYAS ZHES BSHAD PA NA, TSIG SNGA MA SANGS ZHES PA MI MNGON [f. 191a] PAR BYAS NAS TE MI MNGON KYANG, SANGS RGYAS ZHES BSNYAD PA YOD PA JI LTA BA

Now the name “Buddha” is explained as referring to someone who has expanded their mind into suchness; with this explanation though, it is still not obvious how the former of the syllables applies.  Even though it is not evident in this way, we still refer to these beings as “Buddhas”.


[2655]
DE BZHIN DU, GZUGS DANG SEMS GNYIS KYI NANG NAS SEMS TZAM ZHIG GTZO BOR GYUR PA LA TSIG PHYI MA GTZO BOR GYUR PA MI MNGON PAR BYAS NAS, MDO LAS ‘JIG RTEN LA STE KHAMS GSUM NI SEMS TZAM MO ZHES GSUNGS PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

In the same way, we can say—among the two options of form or mind—something is “mind only” in the sense of mind being the main thing.  Now in the second syllable of this term, it may not be obvious that the reference is to being primary; but it can be understood from references in sutra which say that “for the world”—for the three realms of existence—“there is only the mind.”


[2656]
DE’I PHYIR SEMS TZAM MO ZHES PA ‘DIR NI STE ‘DIS NI, GZUGS LA SOGS PA RNAMS KHAMS GSUM ‘GRUB PA LA GTZO BO YIN PA SEL BAR BYED KYI, SEMS TZAM ZHIG KHO NA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YIN GYI PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS NI MED DO ZHES ‘GOG PA DE LTAR ‘CHAD PA NI MDO YI DON MA YIN NO,,

And so let’s look at the term here in the expression “mind only.”  It serves, first of all, to preclude the possibility that—in the formation of the three realms—physical matter is the main thing.  But it is not the meaning of sutra here when people explain it as some kind of denial; that is, as saying that it is just—that is, only—the mind which exists through its own nature, and there is then no outer form.


[2657]
SA BCU PA’I MDO’I DON ‘DI NI KHO BO CAG GIS JI SKAD DU BSHAD PA DE BZHIN DU GDON MI ZA BAR ‘DOD PAR BYA’O,,

As for the meaning of the sutra on The Ten Levels, it should most certainly be accepted just as we for our part have explained it here.


	[2658]
[VI.88]
Rūpam eva yadi tatra niṣiddhaṃ
citta mātram idam ityavagamya,
Moha karmajam uvāca kim arthaṃ
cittam atra punar eva mahatma.

,GAL TE ‘DI DAG SEMS TZAM ZHES MKHYEN NAS,
,DE LAS GZUGS NYID DGAG PAR MDZAD NA NI,
,SLAR YANG DE LAS BDAG NYID CHEN POS SEMS,
,GTI MUG LAS LAS SKYES PAR CI PHYIR GSUNGS,

		Suppose all these
		Were referred to
		As “only the mind,”

		And the Buddha
		Knew this, and so
		Meant in this
To deny “form itself.”

And then how
Could it be in it
For the Great Being
To state that the mind

Was born from
Dark ignorance
And karma?


[2659]
KHYOD KYI LUGS LTAR NA GAL TE KHAMS GSUM PO ‘DI DAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SEMS TZAM MO ZHES MKHYEN NAS, SA BCU PA DE LAS PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS NYID DGAG PAR MDZAD NA NI,

Suppose then it were the way that your system would have it.  That is, suppose all these three realms of existence were referred to as “only the mind,” as something which existed through its own nature.  And suppose the Buddha knew this, and so meant—in this Ten Levels—to deny “form itself,” in the sense of outer form.


[2660]
SLAR YANG SA BCU PA DE LAS BDAG NYID CHEN PO SANGS RGYAS KYIS SEMS TE RNAM SHES DE MA RIG PA’I RKYEN GYIS ‘DU BYED, ‘DU BYED KYI RKYEN GYIS RNAM SHES ZHES GTI MUG MA RIG PA DANG, ‘DU BYED LAS GNYIS LAS SKYES PAR CI’I PHYIR GSUNGS PA RIGS TE MI RIGS SO,,

And then how could it be correct for The Ten Levels to go further, and in it for the Great Being—the Buddha—to state that the mind, which is to say consciousness, triggered (through the factor of misunderstanding) fresh karma; and that then the factor of fresh karma triggered consciousness?  That is, how could it be correct for him to have stated that these things were born from the two of misunderstanding—dark ignorance—and the fresh type of karma?  It could not have then been correct!


[2661]
SA BCU PA’I MDO DE NYID LAS RNAM SHES MA RIG PA DANG ‘DU BYED KYI ‘BRAS BUR GSUNGS KYI, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR NI MA GSUNGS [f. 191b] SO,,

That is, this same Ten Levels does state that consciousness is a result of misunderstanding and fresh karma; but it doesn’t say anything about things existing by definition.


[2662]
RTEN ‘BYUNG DU YANG GSUNGS LA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR YANG GSUNGS NA NI GSUNG BA PO ‘KHRUL ZAD LA DE GNYIS KA RANG LUGS SU BZHED PA MI SRID PAS, GDUL BYA GZHAN BKRI PA’I PHYIR GZHAN NGOR ZHAL GYIS BZHES PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

That is, it would be nothing less than a gross error for the person making these statements to say that things were arising out of dependence, and at the same time to say that they existed by definition.  Which is to say, it would be impossible to say that your own system was that you accepted both concepts.  As such, you should understand that that they were accepted only in front of certain disciples, in order lead them—in time—to something higher.


[2663]
GNYIS KA RANG LUGS SU MI RUNG BA NI GAL TE RNAM PAR SHES PA RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS GRUB PAR GYUR NA NI, RNAM SHES DE MA RIG PA’AM ‘DU BYED LA MI LTOS PAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG NA, LTOS PA YANG YIN TE, DE’I PHYIR RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS GRUB PA NI MED DO,,

And just how is it that both could never represent our own system?  Say for example that consciousness were something that could exist in & of itself.  In that case, consciousness would come to a stop, but without relying on misunderstanding, or on fresh karma; which means that it did depend on something.  And that would mean that it couldn’t be something that existed in & of itself.


[2664]
DE’I PHYIR RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU RNAM PAR SHES PA NI RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MA YIN PA KHO NA STE, RAB RIB CAN GYIS DMIGS PA’I SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA LTAR, PHYIN CI LOG GI RKYEN YOD NA YOD PA’I PHYIR LA, DE KHO NA LTAR PHYIN CI LOG GI RKYEN MED NA MED PA’I PHYIR RO SNYAM DU BSAMS SO,,

And thus we can say that consciousness could never be something—no matter which way you look at it—that could exist through some nature of its own.  Such a thing would be similar to the strand of hair that those who have cataracts think they see—something like that.  If you say that something exists only because it has an erroneous factor, then for the very same reason we’d have to say that if something lacked an erroneous factor, then it couldn’t exist at all.  At least, that’s the way it seems to me.


[2665]
PHYIN CI LOG MA RIG PA’I RKYEN YOD NA RNAM SHES YOD PA NI, RTEN ‘BREL LUGS ‘BYUNG GIS BSTAN LA, MA RIG PA MED NA RNAM SHES LDOG PA NI LUGS LDOG GIS BSTAN PA’I 

The fact that—if the factor of misunderstanding, a mistaken state of mind, is present—then consciousness will be present, is a point which is conveyed in the presentation of interdependence in its forward order.  And then the fact that—if misunderstanding is absent, then consciousness will come to a stop—is conveyed through interdependence in its reverse order.


[2666]
MTHAR, DE LTAR ‘DU BYED DU GYUR PA NYES PA MANG PO’I SKYON CHAGS SHING NGO BO NYID MED PA DANG, MA SKYES PA MA ‘GAGS PAR SO SOR RTOG PA NA ZHES RGYAS PAR GSUNGS TE,

And then at the end of this process we have an extensive description of how—if the link of fresh karma then comes up—many problems will arise; and then we have individual ideas about the lack of an essence to things, and how things neither start nor stop.


[2667]
DE LTAR NA SEMS DANG BCAS PA SU ZHIG DE NYID LAS GSUNGS PA’I LUNG MTHONG NAS RNAM SHES RDZAS SU YOD PAR RTOG PAR BYED DE MI BYED DO,,

And so where could you ever find anyone with a brain that could lay their eyes on these sources and still imagine that consciousness could exist substantially?  Don’t do that!


[2668]
DE LTAR BYED PA NI NANG GI BDEN ‘DZIN GYI GRUB MTHAS BYAS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

When people do act this way, it is caused by beliefs of a school of an inner tendency to hold to things as real.


[2669]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LAS KYANG,
,’JIG RTEN MA RIG RKYEN CAN DU,
,GANG PHYIR RDZOGS PA’I SANGS [f. 192a] RGYAS GSUNG,
,DE YI PHYIR NA ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI,
,RNAM RTOG YIN ZHES CIS MI ‘THAD,

The Sixty Verses on Reasoning also says it like this—

The total Buddhas stated
That the world is rooted
In misunderstanding.

Why then would it ever be
Incorrect to say
That this entire world
Is our imagination?


	[2670]
,MA RIG ‘GAGS PAR GYUR NA NI,
,GANG ZHIG ‘GAG PAR ‘GYUR BA DE,
,MI SHES PA LAS KUN BRTAGS PAR,
,JI LTA BUR NA GSAL MI GYUR,

When misunderstanding
Comes to a stop,
Why wouldn’t those elements
Come to a stop,

Since all the mistaken
Imaginations of failing
To understand things
Were brought to light?


[2671]
ZHES GSUNGS TE, RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB NA GNAS LUGS SU GRUB PAR ‘GYUR LA, DE’I TSE ‘KHRUL PA LOG PA NA GSAL DU ‘GRO DGOS KYI, LDOG PAR MI ‘GYUR RO, ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

The point here is that—if things could exist through some essential nature of their own—then they would exist by the very nature of things.  In that case, if we were able to correct our error, the truth would have to be brought to light.  But in the opposite case, it would not.


	[2672]
[VI.89]
Sattva lokam atha bhājana lokaṃ
cittam eva racayatyaticitram,
Karmajaṃ hi jagad uktam aśeṣaṃ
karma cittam avadhūya ca nāsti,

,SEMS NYID KYIS NI SEMS CAN ‘JIG RTEN DANG,
,SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN SHIN TU SNA TSOGS ‘GOD,
,’GRO BA MA LUS LAS LAS SKYES PAR GSUNGS,
,SEMS SPANGS NAS NI LAS KYANG YOD MA YIN,

	This one thing,
	The mind,

	Has set forth
		The world
		Of living beings,

		And the vessel
		Of the outer world,
		With all its
		Endless variation.

		It was stated that
All the beings there are
Have been created by karma;

If we were to eliminate
The mind, then there
Would no longer be
Any karma either.	


[2673]
SEMS GTZO BO YIN PA DE NYID BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA DE LA SEMS CAN GYI ‘JIG RTEN NI RANG GI SEMS KYIS BSAGS PA’I LAS DANG NYON MONGS PAS BDAG GI DNGOS PO RNYED PA YIN LA,

The goal here then is to explain this one thing: that the mind is the principal point.  To do so, we show how the world of living beings is brought into being as something for them through the karma and the negativities that they have accumulated with their own minds.


[2674]
SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN SHIN TU SNA TSOGS PA NI SEMS CAN DE DAG KHO NA’I SEMS NYID KYIS BSAGS PA’I THUN MONG BA’I LAS KYIS ‘GOD PA STE SKYED DE, RLUNG GI DKYIL ‘KHOR NAS ‘OG MIN GYI SNOD KYI MTHAR THUG PA’O,,

And the vessel of the outer world, with all its endless variation, is something that has been “set forth”—which is to say, created—only by all these living beings, through the communal karma they have accumulated with nothing other than their own minds.  And this refers to the entire universe, up to its very ends—starting from the disk of wind that serves as the foundation of the universe, up to the highest of its levels, known as “Below None.”


[2675]
DE LA RMA BYA LA SOGS PA’I MDONGS LA SOGS PA SNA TSOGS PA NI, SEMS CAN DE RNAMS KHO NA’I LAS THUN MONG MA YIN PAS SKYED PA’O,,

And so things like the extraordinary variety of colors found in things such as the feathers of the peacock are all objects which were created by the unique karma only of living beings themselves.


[2676]
PAD+MA LA SOGS PA’I ‘DAB MA DANG KHA DOG SNA TSOGS PA NI, SEMS CAN GYI THUN MONG GI LAS KYIS BSKYED PA’O,,

The petals and multifarious hues of things like the lotus too are produced from the shared karma of living beings.


[2677]
DE BZHIN DU GZHAN LA’ANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And you can understand everything else there is, as being similar.


[2678]
JI SKAD DU,
,SEMS CAN LAS KYI DBANG GIS RI,
,NAG PO’I DUS SU SKYES TE DPER,
,SEMS DMYAL MTHO RIS ‘JIG RTEN DU,
,MTSON DANG RIN CHEN SHING BZHIN NO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

In the days of darkness,
The mountains rose up
Due to the power
Of the karma of beings.

It was just the same
As how weapons
And trees made of jewel
Appear in the realms
Of hell and the higher births.


[2679]
‘JIG RTEN GNYIS THUN MONG GI LAS YIN MIN GNYIS KYIS BSKYED PA NI, SEMS TZAM [f. 192b] GYI GZHUNG DU YANG BSHAD PAS SEMS TZAM GYI LUGS LA’ANG SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN MED PA MIN NO,,

The idea of two different worlds created by karma of beings which is either shared or not is something that we also observe in the great books of the Mind Only school; as such, we can say that it is not the case that in the Mind Only system there is no vessel of the outer world.


[2680]
DE LTAR NA ‘GRO BA MA LUS PA LAS LAS SKYES PAR GSUNGS SHING, SEMS SPANGS NAS NI LAS KYANG YOD PA MA YIN TE SEMS DANG BCAS PA KHO NAS LAS GSOG PA’I PHYIR NA LAS KYANG SEMS LA BRTEN PA’O,,

Thus it is then that it was stated that all the beings there are have been created by karma; and that—if we were to eliminate the mind—then there would no longer be any karma either.  That is, it being the case that karma is collected only by those who possess a mind, we can say that karma too is something that depends upon the mind.


[2681]
DE LTAR NA SA BCU PAR BYED PA PO DANG TSOR BA PO MED PA ZHES GSUNGS PA LA BRTEN NAS, TZAM GYI SGRAS BYED PA PO GZHAN ‘GOG PAR BSTAN LA, 

We can say then that—based on the statement in The Ten Levels that there is no creator, and no one who has feelings—the term “only” is meant to deny any other creator of things.


[2682]
YAN LAG BCU GNYIS PO THAMS CAD KYANG SEMS GCIG LA BRTEN PAR GSUNGS PA LA BRTEN NAS, TZAM GYI SGRAS SEMS GTZO BOR GYUR PAR BSTAN TE, BSHAD PA SNGA MA DGAG PHYOGS DANG PHYI MA SGRUB PHYOGS NAS YIN NO,,

And so we see statements that all of the twelve links of dependence rely on but one thing, the mind.  Relying on these statements, we can say then that the word “only” is meant to indicate that it is the mind which is primary.  The former of the two statements is made from the negative side of things; while the latter is meant from the positive side of things.


[2683]
DE’I PHYIR ‘GRO BA RAB TU ‘JUG PA LA SEMS NYID GTZO BO’I RGYU YIN GYI, SEMS LAS GZHAN PA NI GTZO BO’I RGYU MIN PAS, MDO LAS SEMS TZAM ZHIG GTZO BOR BZHAG GI GZUGS NI MA YIN NO,,

And so for the concerns of living beings, the mind is the principal cause; but things which are other than the mind are not the main cause of things; as such, what sutra is saying is that it is “only the mind” which is the main thing, and not physical matter.


	[2684]
[VI.90]
Rūpam asti khalu yadyapi tasya
kartṛtā tu na hi cittavad asti,
Tena kartur itarasya hi cittād
vāraṇaṃ na khalu rūpa niṣedhaḥ.

,GAL TE GZUGS YOD MOD KYI DE LA NI,
,SEMS BZHIN BYED PA PO NYID YOD MA YIN,
,DES NA SEMS LAS GZHAN PA’I BYED PA PO,
,BZLOG GI GZUGS NI BKAG PA MA YIN NO,

		We would
		Have to admit
		That physical matter
		Does exist;

		It is not the case
		That with this
		You find the
		One creator,

		As in the case
		Of the mind.
		
		As such, we reject
		Any creator other than
		The mind itself;

		But that is not denying
		Outer form itself.


[2685]
GAL TE GZUGS YOD PAR ‘DOD MOD KYI STE KYANG GZUGS DE LA NI SEMS BZHIN DU ‘GRO BA’I BYED PA PO NYID NI YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

Now we would have to admit that physical matter is indeed something which does exist; but it is not the case that with this matter you find the one creator of beings, as you do in the case of the mind.


[2686]
DES NA SEMS LAS GZHAN PA’I BYED PA PO BZLOG PA STE BKAG GI ,PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS NI BKAG PA MA YIN NO,,

As such, we reject—which is to say, we deny—any creator other than the mind itself.  But we are not thereby denying outer form itself.


[2687]
‘DI NA GRANGS CAN SOGS KHA CIG NI GTZO BO LA SOGS PA BYED PA PO DANG, SANGS RGYAS PA KHA CIG GIS NI SEMS BYED PA POR ‘DOD LA, GZUGS BYED PA PO MIN PA LA NI RTZOD PA MED DO,,

In a sense then there is no argument on this point, at least insofar as these different schools are denying that physical matter is the creator of things.  That is, the Numerists and systems like that say that the Supreme Being or the like is the creator; while some number of the Buddhists say that this creator was the mind.


[2688]
DE’I PHYIR GTZO BO LA SOGS PA GZHAN GYIS BYED PA POR DOGS PA STE BRTAGS PAR BYAS PA, BYED PA PO DE’I MTSAN NYID MED PA GTZO [f. 193a] BO LA SOGS PA KHO NA BSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, THA SNYAD DU BYED PA PO NYID DU NUS PAR MTHONG BAS,

And so let’s look at the Supreme Being or the like, that others impute or imagine is the creator of things.  The goal then became only to refute the idea of a Supreme Being or the like, as lacking the necessary qualities of a creator.  People were looking for something that, in a nominal sense, had the capacity to be a real creator.


[2689]
SEMS TZAM ZHIG BYED PA POR BRJOD PA NA GTZO BO LA SOGS PA BYED PA PO YIN PA BSAL NAS, GTZO BO LA SOGS PA YUL BTON PA’I RTZOD PA’I GNAS KYI YUL GNON NO ZHES BYA BAR RIGS TE,

And so by saying that it was only the mind that was the creator, they could eliminate the possibility that a Supreme Being or something of the like could be the creator.  And so it would be accurate to say now that we had “singled out” a Supreme Being or the like, in the sense of singling them out as the new object of our argument.


[2690]
YUL GCIG LA DBANG BYED PAR ‘DOD PA’I RGYAL PO GNYIS KYI NANG NAS ‘GRAN ZLA GCIG BTON NAS, BTON PA RANG GI YUL ‘THOB CING GNYIS KA LA NYE BAR MKHO BA’I PHYIR SKYE BO PHAL PA LA GNOD PA MED PA LTAR

Suppose for example that there are two kings who would both like to be the one in charge of a single country.  If then you remove one of the two contenders and go to that one and make sure that they get their own separate land as well, then it does no harm to the general populace that is—after all—necessary for both parties.


[2691]
DE BZHIN DU ‘DIR YANG GNYIS KA LA NYE BAR MKHO BA’I PHYIR, GZUGS LA GNOD PA MED PAS GZUGS YOD PA KHO NA YIN NO ZHES BYA BAR NGES PAR BYA’O,,

Here the case is the same; after all, the concept of physical matter is something which is helpful to both parties.  And so we would certainly have to avoid challenging the concept of form in general, in a sense saying “form only”—but with the connotation that “form is only something which exists.”



Outer & inner are equivalent

[2692]
GNYIS PA NI,

With this we have reached our second part from above: a demonstration that outside objects, and the inner mind, are equivalent in either existing or not existing.


	[2693]
[VI.91]
Pañcāpyete santi loka prasiddhāḥ
skandhās tattve laukike’vasthitasya,
Tattva jñānasyodaye vāñchite vai
pañcāpyete yogināṃ naivajātāḥ.

,’JIG RTEN PA YI DE NYID LA GNAS LA,
,PHUNG PO ‘JIG RTEN GRAGS TE LNGA CHAR YOD,
,DE NYID YE SHES ‘CHAR BAR ‘DOD PA NA,
,RNAL ‘BYOR PA LA DE LNGA ‘BYUNG MI ‘GYUR,

		All five do exist,
Just as they are
Spoken of in
		The everyday world:

		That part
		Can be found
		In the way things are,
		According to the world.

		In a case where
		We accept that
		There can appear
		That wisdom
		Of suchness,

		These five
		Do not occur
		For a deep practitioner.


[2694]
DE PHYIR DE LTAR SNGAR JI SKAD BSTAN PA’I TSUL GYIS ‘JIG RTEN PA YI DE NYID DE RNAM GZHAG LA GNAS PA LA PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS KYI PHUNG PO LA SOGS PA RNAMS ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS TE PHUNG PO LNGA CHAR YOD LA, 

And so as such, we have demonstrated that all five parts to a person, just as they are spoken of in the everyday world, do exist.  Which is to say that—in the way in which we described it before—there does exist that part of outside form which can be found in the presentation of the way things are, according to the world at large.


[2695]
DE KHO NA NYID MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA’I YE SHES ‘CHAR BAR ‘DOD PA NA RNAL ‘BYOR PA MNYAM PAR GZHAG PA LA DE’I NGOR PHUNG PO DE LNGA ‘BYUNG BAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

In a case where we accept that there can appear to a person that wisdom which perceives suchness directly, then we can say that these five parts to a person do not occur in the perceptions of this balanced meditation of a deep practitioner.


	[2696]
[VI.92]
	Rūpābhāve mā grahīś cittasattāṃ
rūpābhāvaṃ cittasattve ca mā gāḥ,
Prajñānītau sūtra ete samānaṃ
Buddhaiḥ kṣiptā varṇitāś cābhidharme.


[VI.92a]
,GZUGS MED NA NI SEMS YOD MA ‘DZIN ZHIG
,SEMS YOD ‘DI NA’ANG GZUGS MED MA ‘DZIN ZHIG

		If there exists
		No form,
		Then you shouldn’t
		Hold that mind
		Exists either.

		And if
		Mind exists,
		You shouldn’t
Be holding that
There exists no form.


[2697]
GANG GI PHYIR DE LTA YIN PA DE’I PHYIR PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS MED PAR ‘DOD NA NI SEMS YOD PAR MA ‘DZIN CIG ,NANG GI SEMS YOD PAR ‘DOD PA NYID YIN NA’ANG PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS MED PAR MA ‘DZIN CIG

For the reason that this is the way that things are, if you are going to hold that there exists no outer form, then you shouldn’t hold to the idea that mind exists either.  And if you want to be someone who keeps holding to this belief that the inner mind exists, then you shouldn’t be holding to the idea that there exists no outer form.


[2698]
,GANG GI TSE BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I ‘THAD PAS DPYAD PA NA PHYI’I GZUGS MED PAR RTOG NA NI DE’I TSE PHYI NANG GNYIS KA’I YOD PA ‘THAD PAS LAS ‘GRUB PA [f. 193b] DANG BRAL BA’I PHYIR NANG GI SEMS MED PAR YANG RTOGS PAR BYA DGOS LA,

And suppose you use reasoning to go looking for the the thing that is given the name, and thus come to the idea that there is no outer form.  At that point, you would fail to be able to establish karma, through reasoning which establishes both the existence of the outer and the inner.  And at that juncture, you would have to come to a realization that there was no mind, on the inside.


[2699]
YANG GANG GI TSE SEMS YOD PA NYID DU RTOG NA NI DE’I TSE GZUGS KYANG RTOGS PAR BYA DGOS TE GNYIS KA YANG ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Or we could say that if you think that the mind truly is something that exists, then you would also have to come to the realization that form exists as well.  After all, both of them are accepted by the world at large.


[2700]
‘DIR SEMS TZAM PAS GZUGS DANG SEMS GNYIS LA YOD MED KYI KHYAD PAR ‘DOD PAR BSHAD PA’I GZUGS MED PA NI PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS MED PA YIN TE, PHYI GZUNG MED PAR RANG GI SA BON LAS, ,SNGO SOGS SNANG NYID ‘BYUNG BAR, ZHES GSUNGS SHING

So here we have those of the Mind Only saying that they believe that there is a difference between the two of form and the mind, where one exists but the other does not.  And when they say that form does not exist, what they’re saying is that it’s outer form that does not exist.  As the text says,

		The appearance
		Of blue and the like,
		Comes from
		Seeds for it
		In the absence
		Of outer objects.


[2701]
DE’I ‘GREL PA LAS KYANG, SNGON PO LA SOGS PA’I PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS MED PAR ZHES GZUGS MED PA’I DGAG BYA LA PHYI ROL GYI KHYAD PAR SMOS SHING,

We also see the autocommentary on this specifically mentioning the qualification of “outer” to the thing that we deny when we say “there exists no form”: “none of the outer form of blue and the rest exists.”


[2702]
YANG ‘GREL PA LAS, TZAM GYI SGRAS SHES BYA ‘GOG PAR MI NUS PAR BRJOD NAS RNAM PA GZHAN DU BSHAD PA LAS KYANG PHYI ROL ‘GOG PA MI SRID PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA ZHES GZUGS ‘GOG PA MDO’I DON MIN PAR GSUNGS PA’I GZUGS ‘GOG PA PHYI ROL ‘GOG PA LA BSHAD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And for the same reason we also see in the autocommentary:

Having described how the term “only” would not be able to deny existing entities, there may be other ways of explaining it; and the clarification is meant to indicate that it is not possible to deny outer objects.

What this is saying is that denying form is not the intent of the sutra; but rather that the denial of form here is a a denial of that which is outside.


[2703]
DE LTA MA YIN PAR TSIG ZIN TZAM LA BYED NA TZAM GYI SGRAS SHES BYA ‘GOG MI NUS PA BRJOD NAS, ZHES GSUNGS PAS SEMS TZAM PAS TZAM GYI SGRAS SEMS KYI SHES BYA BKAG PAR ‘DOD DO ZHES KYANG BRJOD PAR BYA’O,,

If this were not the way it is, and we were to take the “only” in its literal sense, then what this is saying is that the “only” could not be able to deny an existing entity.  As such, we would also have to say that Mind Only believed that the term “only” was meant to deny the existing entity of the mind itself.


[2704]
GAL TE SEMS TZAM PAS GZUGS CAN KHAS MI LEN NA SEMS TZAM PAS KUN GZHI SGRUB PA’I RIGS PA STON PA NA, THEG BSDUS LAS, NYING MTSAMS SBYOR BA SBREL {%SPREL} ZIN PA RNAMS KYI DBANG PO GZUGS CAN ‘DZIN PAR BYED PA YANG DE LAS GZHAN RNAM PAR SMIN PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA MED PAR {%this med-pa not in Teng!} MI [f. 194a] ‘THAD DE ZHES DANG,

And suppose you say that the Mind Only did not accept things with form.  In such a case, it would be a sheer contradiction for A Compendium of the Greater Way to make certain statements that it does, in its presentation of the reasoning that the Mind Only uses for for establishing foundation consciousness.  One of these is—

It would be incorrect to say that those who have already made the connection of the crossing between death & birth—and who were thus holding to sense powers consisting of form—possessed none of the consciousness that was other than these and which had then ripened.


[2705]
RNAM PAR SHES PA DANG MING DANG GZUGS MDUNG KHYIM LTAR GCIG LA GCIG BRTEN PA’I TSUL GYIS ‘JUG PA GANG YIN PA DE YANG RNAM PAR SMIN PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA MED NA MI RUNG NGO, ZHES GSUNGS PA RNAMS ‘GAL BA KHO NAR ‘GYUR TE

Another of these references says that—in a case where consciousness and name & form engage in dependence one upon the other, like spears leaned point-up against each other in a tripod—then “it would be incorrect to say that there was no consciousness that had ripened here.”


[2706]
GZUGS CAN GYI CHOS KHAS BLANGS NA PHYI ROL KHAS LEN DGOS PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Which is to say, if you accept the idea of entities which have form, then you would have to accept the idea of things on the outside.


[2707]
DES NA RNAM PAR SHES PA’I RKYEN GYIS MING GZUGS SKYE BA SOGS KHAS LEN KYANG PHYI ROL KHAS LEN MI DGOS PAR ‘DOD PA LA BZLOG NAS SMRA BAR MI BYA STE, SEMS TZAM GYI THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I RNAM GZHAG STON PA NA DE LTAR BSHAD PA SHIN TU MANG NGO,,

As such, I would encourage people not to say it all backwards here: don’t go around claiming that you can accept for example that name & form arise through the factor of consciousness, but that this doesn’t necessitate accepting things on the outside.  We see a massive number of people offering this type of explanation when they make presentations of the unique beliefs of the Mind Only.


	[2708]
[VI.92b]
,DE DAG SHES RAB TSUL MDOR SANGS RGYAS KYIS,
,MTSUNGS PAR SPANGS SHING MNGON PA’I CHOS LAS GSUNGS,

		In sutras
		On the ways
		Of wisdom,

		The Buddha
		Treated them
		As equivalent,
		In rejecting.

		He also stated this
		In the teachings
		Of higher knowledge.


[2709]
LUNG LAS KYANG PHYI ROL GYI DON DANG NANG GI SHES PA YOD MED MTSUNGS PA DE LTAR RTOGS PAR BYA STE, ‘DI LTAR GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I PHUNG PO LNGA PO DE DAG NI SHES RAB KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I TSUL GYI MDOR NI SANGS RGYAS KYIS LNGA CHAR YANG MTSUNGS PAR RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA SPANGS SHING STE BKAG PA YIN TE,

We can also understand, from scripture, how outside objects and inside awareness must be equivalent, in either existing or not existing.  We can look thus at physical form and the rest of the five parts to the person as these are presented in sutras on the ways of the perfection of wisdom.  Here, the Buddha treated all five as equivalent, in rejecting—that is, denying—that they could exist through any nature of their own.


[2710]
RAB ‘BYOR GZUGS NI RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG NGO ZHES BYA BA NAS RNAM PAR SHES PA NI RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG NGO ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And that’s because he made statements ranging from “O Subhuti, form is empty of any nature of its own” up to “awareness is empty of any nature of its own.”


[2711]
CHOS MNGON PA LAS NI LNGA CHAR YANG RANG DANG SPYI’I MTSAN NYID LA SOGS PA’I SGO NAS MTSUNGS PAR GSUNGS SO,,

In the teachings of higher knowledge as well, it is stated that all five are equivalent in features such as both their unique and general defining characteristics.


	[2712]
[VI.93]
Bhitvāpyetāṃ satyayor ānupūrvīṃ
na dravyaṃ te yāti siddhiṃ niṣiddham,
Tasmād evaṃ prakramād viddhi bhāvān
loke jātāṃs tattva taś cādyajātān.

,BDEN GNYIS RIM PA ‘DI DAG BSHIG NAS KYANG,
,KHYOD KYI RDZAS NI BKAG PAS ‘GRUB MI ‘GYUR,
,DE PHYIR DE LTA’I RIM PAS DNGOS GDOD NAS,
,DE NYID MA SKYES ‘JIG RTEN SKYES RIG BYA,

		Even though
These stages
		Of the two realities
		Are destroyed,

		That doesn’t mean
		That your idea
		Of the substantial
		Is established;
		For it was disproved.

		Thus it is that,
		Because of stages
		Like that,
		
		Entities have
		Never arisen,
		For all the time
		There ever was.

		It is reasonable
		To say,
		In the world,
		That they have arisen.


[2713]
DE’I PHYIR PHA ROL GYIS NI SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR PHYI ROL DANG SEMS GNYIS DON DAM PAR MED MNYAM DANG, KUN RDZOB TU YOD MNYAM DU LUNG DANG RIGS PAS GRUB PA’I BDEN GNYIS KYI RIM PA ‘DI DAG BSHIG [f. 194b] PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As such, the explanation of the other side about these stages of the two realities is destroyed: where it is established by both scripture & reasoning that the two of outside things and the mind are equivalent in not existing in an ultimate way, and equivalent as well in existing in a deceptive way.


[2714]
DE LTAR BSHIG NAS KYANG SEMS TZAM PA KHYOD KYI GZHAN DBANG RDZAS SU GRUB PA NI ‘GRUB PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

And even though these things are thus destroyed, that doesn’t mean that your Mind Only idea of dominated entities that exist substantially is established.


[2715]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, GANG GI PHYIR SNGAR GZHAN DBANG RDZAS SU GRUB PA LAN DU MAR BKAG PA DE’I PHYIR, KHYOD KYI NGAL BA DON MED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And why is that?  Because all your efforts to exhaust yourself here are simply pointless, given that we have earlier on disproved—many times over—your idea that dominated entities could exist substantially.


[2716]
BDEN GNYIS KYI RIM PA MI ‘JIG PA LA DON DAM PAR MED CING THA SNYAD DU YOD PAR ‘DOD DGOS PA DE’I PHYIR, SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTA BU’I RIM PAS DNGOS PO RNAMS GDOD MA NAS DE KHO NA NYID DU MA SKYES SHING, ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD DU SKYES PAR RIG PAR BYA’O ZHES GSUNGS TE,

To keep the stages of the two realities from being destroyed, you would have to agree to the idea that they do not exist in any ultimate way, but do exist nominally.  Thus it is that it was stated that—because of the stages that we have previously explained as being like that, we would have to say that entities have never arisen, for all the time there ever was, through some inherent nature of their own; and that it is still reasonable to say, in the normal parlance of the world, that they have arisen.


[2717]
‘DIS NI DNGOS PO RNAMS MA SKYES PA DON DAM DANG, SKYES PA THA SNYAD DU KHAS BLANG BAR STON PAS DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR NGES PAR SBYAR BAR BYA’O,,

What all this is demonstrating is that we accept that the way in which things do not arise is the ultimate; and that their arising is nominal.  As such, we definitely have to differentiate what we deny, by applying certain distinctions.



“Mind only” in
A Journey to Langka

[2718]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, PHYI ROL MED PA’I SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA DRANG DON DU BSTAN PA, MDO’I DRANG NGES KYI DON RTOGS PA’I THABS BSTAN PA’O,,

Which brings us to our third step from above: an explanation of how the intent of “mind only” is described in A Journey to Langka.  We proceed in two sections here: a demonstration that the statement that things were mind only, without anything on the outside, was meant figuratively; and then showing the way in which we can understand which points in sutra are meant figuratively, and which meant literally.


[2719]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, DRANG DON DU LUNG GIS BSTAN PA, RIGS PAS BSTAN PA’O,,

We cover the first section in two stages: showing how scripture takes this statement as figurative; and then showing how logic does the same.


[2720]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, DE ‘DRA BA’I MDO GZHAN YANG DRANG DON DU BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these stages has two points of its own: the actual point to be made; and then showing how other such sutras should be taken figuratively as well.  We begin now with the first.


[2721]
GAL TE YANG SA BCU PA’I MDO’I DON DE LTAR BSHAD MOD KYI, DE LTA NA YANG LUNG GZHAN LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS,
,PHYI ROL SNANG BA YOD MED DE,
,SEMS NI SNA TSOGS RNAMS SU SNANG,
,LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD GNAS ‘DRA BA,
,SEMS TZAM DU NI NGAS BSHAD DO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

One may come then saying the following:

Admittedly, the meaning of The Ten Levels may be explained that way; but then again we also have the following lines, from A Journey to Langka—

		The appearance
		That things exist
		On the outside
		Is actually nothing;

		It is only the mind
		Appearing in a
		Variety of ways.

		Things like your body,
		And all that you use,
		And the place where you live—

		What I say is that
		All of them
		Are there only
		In the mind.


[2722]
DE LA LUS NI MIG LA SOGS PA’I SKYE MCHED GZUGS CAN RNAMS SO,,

The word “body” here is a reference to the eye, and the rest of the physical doors of sense.


[2723]
LONGS SPYOD NI GZUGS SGRA SOGS [f. 195a] YUL LNGA’O,,

And when it says “all that you use,” it’s referring to the five objects of the senses: visible form, sound, and the rest.


[2724]
GNAS NI SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN NO,,

“Place where you live” then is a reference to the outer vessel of the world.


[2725]
SEMS LAS LOGS SHIG NA PHYI ROL YOD PA MA YIN PA’I PHYIR, RNAM PAR SHES PA TZAM ZHIG KHO NA LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD DANG GNAS SU SNANG BA SKYE BA NA YUL GYI DNGOS POR GNAS PA LUS LA SOGS PA RNAM PAR SHES PA LAS THA DAD PAR PHYI ROL LTA BUR MNGON PA YIN NO,,

The point is that there does not exist anything on the outside: something discrete from the mind.  And so when there arises the appearance that what is actually nothing more than consciousness seems to be our body, and the things we make use of, and the place where we live, those entities which are serving as the object of our awareness do appear as if they were a body and such on the outside, separate from our consciousness.


[2726]
DE’I PHYIR KHAMS GSUM PA NI SEMS TZAM YIN NO ZHE NA,

As such, these three realms of the universe are only mind.


	[2727]
[VI.94]
Yatrāpyuktaṃ nāsti dṛśyaṃ bahir vai
cittaṃ citraṃ dṛśyate ceti sūtre,
Rūpe’tyantaṃ ye prasaktā badhāna
rūpaṃ tebhyas tac ca neyārtham ehi.

,MDO SDE GANG LAS PHYI ROL SNANG YOD MIN,
,SEMS NI SNA TSOGS SNANG NGO ZHES GSUNGS PA,
,GZUGS LA SHIN TU CHAGS GANG DE DAG LA,
,GZUGS BZLOG PA STE DE YANG DRANG DON NYID,

There is that sutra
Which states that
The appearance
Of the outside
Is nothing that exists.

What this is saying
Is that the mind
Appears in a
Variety of ways.

There are those
With an extreme
Attraction to forms;

And so they put
A stop to forms
For these individuals—

And those were only intended
As something metaphorical.


[2728]
MDO ‘DI YANG DGONGS PA CAN NYID DU BRJOD PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,
,MDO SDE GANG LAS PHYI ROL SNANG YOD MIN,
,SEMS NI SNA TSOGS SNANG NGO ZHES GSUNGS PA,

In reply then we see the following lines of the root text, which are meant to say that this sutra too was only meant metaphorically—

There is that sutra
Which states that
The appearance
Of the outside
Is nothing that exists.

What this is saying
Is that the mind
Appears in a
Variety of ways.


[2729]
,DE’I DGONGS PA NI ‘DI YIN TE, GANG DAG GZUGS LA SHIN TU CHAGS PA’I RKYEN CAN GYI RDZAS SU CHAGS PA DANG, KHONG KHRO BA DANG NGA RGYAL LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYIS ‘JUG PA RANG DBANG MED PAR BYAS PAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

What is intended here is the following.  There are those individuals for whom certain emotions engage, beyond their control.  These are—for example—a desire for physical things triggered by an extreme attraction to forms; or else getting angry, or feeling pride.


[2730]
DE LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PAS DE DAG SDIG PA CHEN PO DANG SBYOR LA BSOD NAMS DANG YE SHES KYI TSOGS BSAGS PA LAS NYAMS PAR ‘GYUR BA

And then because of their strong craving, people like this undertake major negative actions; which means that they begin to fail in their intended accumulation of merit and wisdom.


[2731]
DE DAG LA BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS GZUGS KYI RKYEN CAN GYI NYON MONGS PA BZLOG PA’I PHYIR, CHAGS PA CAN DAG LA PHYI ROL GYI YUL LA CHAGS PA ‘JOMS PA’I KENG RUS LTAR, 

The Conquerors then undertake to help these individuals put a stop to the negative emotions they feel—those emotions that find their causes in form.  And so then they teach them something like the visualization of skeletons, which smashes the attraction to outer objects that these people with craving feel so strongly.


[2732]
DE LTA BUR GYUR PA MA YIN YANG DE LTA BU NYID DU SEMS TZAM NYID BSTAN PA YIN NO ZHES BYA BAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

The things that they are taught to visualize are not actual skeletons; but what the sutra is indicating is that they are only a mental form of those very things.  This is how we should understand its lines.


[2733]
YANG LUNG ‘DI DRANG BA’I DON NYID YIN GYI NGES DON NI MA YIN NO ZHES BYA BA DE LTAR GANG LAS NGES SHE NA,

And one may then inquire—

Are there any other means that we can employ to understand that this particular citation was only intended as something metaphorical, and is therefore not something that was literal?


	[2734]
[VI.95]
Neyārthatvaṃ cādideśāsya śāstā
yuktā yuktyā cāpi neyārthatāsya,
Sūtrasyānyasyāpi caivaṃ vidhasya
neyārthatvaṃ dyotayatyāgamo’yam.

[VI.95a]
,’DI NI STON PAS DRANG DON NYID GSUNGS SHING,
,’DI NI DRANG DON NYID DU RIGS PAS ‘THAD,

	This statement was made
	By the Teacher only
	As something to be
	Taken figuratively;

	It can also be established
	That it was only meant
	As metaphorical,
	And nothing more—
	
	Through logical reasoning.


[2735]
PHYI ROL MED PAR SEMS TZAM MO ZHES GSUNGS PA ‘DI NI, STON PAS DRANG DON NYID DU GSUNGS PAS LUNG LAS DRANG DON DU ‘GRUB LA, MDO [f. 195b] ‘DI NI DRANG DON NYID DU RIGS PAS KYANG ‘THAD PA STE ‘GRUB BO,,

Let’s consider then this statement that things are only the mind—and that there are no outer things.  It was indeed made by the Teacher only as something that was meant to be taken figuratively; and we have shown that it can be established as such, from scripture itself.  So too though it can also be established—shown that it was only meant as metaphorical, and nothing more—through logical reasoning as well.


[2736]
DE LTAR PHYI ROL SNANG BA YOD MED DO, ZHES PA RNAMS KYIS SEMS TZAM DU BSTAN PA’I TZAM GYI SGRAS NI SA BCU PA’I MDO LAS BSHAD PA LTAR PHYI ROL MI ‘GOG BYED PA PO GZHAN ‘GOG CES SLOB DPON ‘DIS MI ‘CHAD KYI, DE LA NI TZAM GYI SGRAS PHYI ROL ‘GOG KYANG MDO DE DRANG DON NO ZHES ‘GREL LO,,

And so let’s look at this word “only” in the expression “mind only” as it appears in the citation here about “The appearance that things exist on the outside is actually nothing.”  It is not the case that our particular master here explains this reference as he did the sutra of The Ten Levels: as denying a creator, rather than denying things on the outside.  The way he comments on this is by saying that the word “only” does indeed deny outside things, but that this sutra reference is—rather—something that was only meant in a figurative way.


[2737]
SLOB DPON CHEN PO LEGS LDAN GYIS NI MDO DES KYANG SEMS LUS DANG, LONGS SPYOD DANG GNAS DANG ‘DRA BA STE DE’I RNAM PA GRIB MA LTA BUS KHA BSGYUR BAR SKYE BA LA ‘CHAD CING PHYI ROL YOD MIN GYIS KYANG BLOS RNAM MED DU MTHONG BA ‘GOG PAR BZHED PAS TZAM GYI SGRAS PHYI ROL ‘GOG PA MIN PAR ‘CHAD DO,,

The great master Bhavaviveka interprets the sutra in a way where the term “only” is not meant to deny outer objects.  Rather, he says that the sutra is saying that the mind colors the formation of our body, our possessions, and our environment in the same way that a shadow might.  Saying that things don’t exist on the outside then is meant, according to him, to deny that the mind could perceive things that have no existence at all.



Other sutras on “mind only”
are also figurative

[2738]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from above: showing how other such sutras should be taken figuratively as well.


	[2739]
	[VI.95b]
,RNAM PA DE LTA’I MDO SDE GZHAN YANG NI,
,DRANG DON NYID DU LUNG ‘DIS GSAL BAR BYED,

	There are
Citations from
	The body of sutras
	Like those;

	But there are
	Even more citations

	Which these quotations
	Explain to be taken
	Metaphorically.


[2740]
PHYI ROL SNANG BA YOD MED DE, ZHES SOGS KYIS PHYI ROL MED PAR SEMS TZAM ZHIG YOD PAR BSTAN PA DRANG DON YIN PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, SNGAR BSHAD PA RNAM PA DE LTA BU’I MDO SDE SEMS TZAM PA RNAMS KYIS NGES DON DU KHAS BLANGS PA LAS, GZHAN YANG NI DRANG DON NYID DU ‘CHAD ‘GYUR GYI LUNG ‘DIS GSAL BAR BYED DO,,

It’s not only the case that statements which teach about “mind only”—such as “The appearance that things exist on the outside is actually nothing”—are the only ones that should be taken metaphorically.  That is, followers of the Mind Only do take citations from the body of sutras that are like those that we’ve already mentioned here, and accept that they are to be taken literally.  But there are even more citations than these lines which these quotations to come below explain should be taken metaphorically.


[2741]
RNAM PA DE LTA BU’I MDO SDE DE YANG GANG YIN ZHE NA,

“What then,” you may ask, “are these further citations from sutra?”


[2742]
DGONGS PA NGES ‘GREL LAS NGO BO NYID GSUM BSTAN PA LAS, KUN BRTAGS PA MED PA DANG, GZHAN GYI DBANG YOD PA DANG,

Well, the autocommentary points first to the sections in What I Really Meant which describe the three different natures of things, and say that fabrications don’t exist at all; and that dominated entities do exist.


[2743]
DE BZHIN DU,
,LEN PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA ZAB CING PHRA,
,SA BON THAMS CAD CHU YI RGYUN LTA ‘BAB,
,BDAG TU RTOG PAR GYUR NA MI RUNG ZHES,
,BYIS PA RNAMS LA NGAS NI DE MA BSTAN,
ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA STE, ZHES ‘GREL PAR GSUNGS SO,,

And then it references the following verse from the sutra—

The consciousness
Which takes it on
Is deep, and subtle;

All of these seeds
Flow down like
A stream of water.

I never came
To the infants
And told them,

You should never think
That anything is itself.


[2744]
DE LA MDO DER KUN BRTAGS RANG GI [f. 196a] MTSAN NYID KYIS MED PA DANG, GZHAN DBANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS YOD PA’I YOD MED KYI KHYAD PAR PHYI’O {%PHYE’O? scan says PHYI’O},,

That is, here in this sutra there is a distinction made between existing and not existing in the sense of fabrications not existing by definition; and dominated entities existing by definition.


[2745]
BDAG GNYIS SU KUN BRTAGS PA LTA BU DANG, CHOS RNAMS LA NGO BO DANG KHYAD PAR DU BTAGS PA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA NI, DE’I LUGS KYIS SHES BYA LA MI SRID KYANG NGO BO DANG KHYAD PAR DU BTAGS PA’I KUN BRTAGS DU MA ZHIG NI GZHI GRUB PA YIN NO,,

And so first we have fabricated things such as that into the two realities; and where entities are labelled into the essence and the features, as things that exist by definition.  Even though—in this system—these things are impossible with reference to existing objects, many examples of fabricated things labelled as essence and features do indeed exist.


[2746]
MDO DER GZHAN DBANG DANG YONGS GRUB GNYIS KA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR GSUNGS KYANG, ‘GREL PAR GZHAN DBANG TZAM LAS MA GSUNGS PA NI DBU SEMS BDEN PAR YOD MED RTZOD PA’I GZHI’I GTZO BO NI GZHAN DBANG YIN TE KUN BRTAGS ‘DOGS PA’I GZHI YANG GZHAN DBANG YIN LA, YONGS GRUB KYANG GZHAN DBANG LA BRTEN NAS GZHAG DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

In the sutra, both dominated entities and totality are said to exist by definition; but in the commentary we only see mention here of the dominated ones.  This is because the main point of contention between the Middle Way and the Mind Only schools—as far as the question of whether they exist in truth or not—is the dominated entities.  That is, the basis upon which we label things as fabrications consists of these entities; and we must also posit totality itself on the basis of of these same dominated entities.


[2747]
DE LTAR PHYE BA YANG LUGS ‘DIS DRANG DON DU ‘CHAD DO,,

This system adds that even that kind of division itself is a point that we should take metaphorically.


[2748]
YANG MDO DER LEN PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA ZHES SOGS KYIS RNAM SHES TSOGS BRGYAD DU GSUNGS PA’I ‘JUG SHES DRUG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I KUN GZHI RNAM SHES GSUNGS PA YANG ‘DIR DRANG DON DU ‘CHAD DO, KUN GZHI RNAM SHES MED NA NI NYON YID KYANG GZHAG TU MED PA YIN NO,,

The same sutra, when it mentions things like “the consciousness which takes it on,” is referring to the collection of eight types of consciousness—which includes a foundation consciousness which is essentially distinct from the six sense consciousnesses.  This too is explained here as being a point to be taken figuratively.  And if no foundation consciousness exists, then negative consciousness is also something that can no longer be posited.


[2749]
LA SOGS PA’I SGRAS BSDUS PA LA MDO DER PHYI ROL BKAG PA DANG, MTHAR THUG THEG PA GSUM DU BSHAD PA GNYIS TE, ‘DIR DRANG DON DU ‘GREL DGOS PA BZHI YOD DO,,

When the autocommentary just quoted mentions “the autocommentary points first,” it’s implying other parts; these are where, in the sutra, places where things on the outside are denied, and the description of how there are, ultimately speaking, three different ways.


[2750]
‘DI RNAMS LA GO BA MTHA’ CHOD PAR MA CHAGS NA SPYIR DBU SEMS DANG KHYAD PAR DU LUGS ‘DI’I GNAD THUN MONG MA YIN PA RNAMS MI SHES PAR MTHONG NAS DRANG [f. 196b] NGES RNAM PAR ‘BYED PAR ZHIB TU BSHAD DO,,

I have come to the realization that if a person fails to develop a definitive understanding of these points, then more generally they will never come to an understanding of the schools of the Middle Way and the Mind Only—most especially the unique, crucial points of this particular way of things.  As such, I have explained covered all these ideas in great detail in my presentation on distinguishing the literal & the figurative.


[2751]
DGONGS ‘GREL LAS TSIG GANG GIS PHYI ROL MED PAR BSTAN PA NI, THEG BSDUS LAS, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI SPYOD YUL GYI GZUGS BRNYAN DE CI SEMS DE LAS THA DAD PA ZHES BGYI’AM THA DAD PA MA LAGS PA ZHES BGYI, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS BKA’ STZAL PA, BYAMS PA THA DAD PA MA YIN ZHES BYA’O,,

What exactly is the wording in What I Really Meant which presents the idea that there is nothing on the outside?  The Compendium of the Greater Way cites it this way:

He asked, “O Conqueror, what about this reflection in a mirror which is the object of the activity of concentration?  Are you saying that it is the case that the reflection is something distinct from the mind; or are you saying that it is not?”

And then the Conqueror made the following declaration: “O Loving One, it is not distinct.”


[2752]
DE CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, RNAM PAR SHES PA NI DMIGS PA RNAM PAR RIG PA TZAM GYIS RAB TU PHYE BA CAN YIN NO ZHES NGES {%NGAS Teng} BSHAD DO, ZHES SOGS DRANGS PA RNAMS YIN NO,,

“And why is that?  Because what I say is that consciousness is something that is distinguished only by being aware of an object of perception.”


[2753]
LUGS ‘DIS NI SNGAR BSHAD PA’I DON TSAN BZHI GA DRANG DON DU ‘GREL GYI, DE DAG GI GSEB NAS KHA CIG DRANG DON DANG, KHA CIG NGES DON DU ‘GREL BA LTAR NI MI MDZAD DO,,

In this system, all four of the points covered earlier are interpreted as being metaphoric; it is not the case that they take some points out of the middle of the four together and say that this particular one is metaphoric, but this particular one is literal.


[2754]
‘DI LA YANG MTHAR THUG THEG PA GSUM DU BSHAD PA NI ‘PHAGS PA NYID KYIS MDO KUN LAS BTUS PA LAS MTHAR THUG THEG PA GCIG TU SGRUB PA LAS GO NUS PAR DGONGS NAS ‘JUG ‘GREL DU MA SMOS SO,,

Along the same lines, the explanation that—ultimately—there are three ways is something that can be understood from the substantiation in A Compendium of All the Sutras of that ultimately there is only on way.  This is why we don’t see it stated in the autocommentary to Entering the Middle Way.


[2755]
LHAG MA GSUM GYI PHYI ROL MED PAR SEMS TZAM ZHIG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR BSTAN PA DRANG DON DU LUNG GIS GSAL BAR BYED PA NI, LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS,
,JI LTAR NAD PA NAD PA LA,
,SMAN PA SMAN RNAMS GTONG BA LTAR,
,SANGS RGYAS DE BZHIN SEMS CAN LA,
,SEMS TZAM DU YANG RAB TU GSUNGS,
ZHES PA ‘DI YIN TE

Things not existing on the outside, and being the mind only, and existing through some nature of their own—according the remaining three points—are ideas that are clarified in citations from scripture as being metaphoric.  Here for example is what the Journey to Langka says:

Doctors deliver medicines
To those who are ill
According to the disease;

In the same way,
The Buddhas keep telling
Beings that it is all
Only the mind.


[2756]
NAD PA SO SO LA SMAN STER BA NI SMAN PA’I RANG DBANG GIS MA YIN GYI, NAD PA’I NAD KYI TSUL DANG BSTUN DGOS PA BZHIN DU SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA YANG STON PA’I RANG LUGS KYI DBANG GIS [f. 197a] MIN GYI, GDUL BYA’I BSAM PA’I DBANG GIS YIN PAR GSUNGS PAS LUNG SNGA MA DRANG DON DU SHES SO,,

When a doctor prescribes medicine for different patients, it is not something that they do just on their own; rather, they have to prescribe according to the way in which the sick person is sick.  What these lines are saying is that—in the same way—describing things as mind only is not something that the Teacher did because this was his own system of thinking; rather, he acted as demanded by the way that his disciples were thinking.  As such, that earlier scriptural citation can be understood as metaphorical.


[2757]
JI LTAR NAD PA ZHES SOGS KYI MJUG TU ‘GREL PA LAS, DE BZHIN DU BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYI {Tengy: %KYIS} MDO BRJOD PA LAS ZHES PA NAS, MNGON PAR RDZOGS PAR ‘TSANG RGYA BA JI LTAR ‘GYUR ZHES TE, ZHES PA’I BAR LANG GSHEGS LAS GSUNGS PA RNAMS DRANGS PA NI RNAM RIG PAS KUN GZHI NGES DON DU KHAS BLANGS PA DRANG DON DU STON PA’I LUNG NGO,,

Just after the part about the patients and so on, the autocommentary continues with the wording that goes from “In the same way, when the Conqueror expressed these things in sutra…” up to “…how could one then attain perfect & total enlightenment?”  What this section is saying is that the citations that the Mentalists assert to be an acceptance of the concept of a foundation consciousness were actually scripture that was intended to express something to be taken metaphorically.


[2758]
‘DIR ‘GREL BSHAD LAS DE BZHIN DU ZHES PAS RTAG BRTAN GYI SNYING PO GSUNGS PA DRANG DON YIN PA DE BZHIN DU SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA YANG DRANG DON DU STON PA YIN ZER BA NI LOG PAR SMRA BA YIN TE, ‘GREL PA LAS SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA DRANG DON YIN PA DE BZHIN DU ZHES PA’I DON DU GSAL BAR BSHAD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Some people claim that when the autocommentary states “in the same way” at this point, what it means to say is that statements that things are mind only were taught metaphorically, in the same way that Lord Buddha talked about “a heart that was unchanging and firm.”  This position though is completely mistaken, since that point is very clearly made in the autocommentary when it says that a case is similar to how “statements about things being mind only” were meant only metaphorically.


[2759]
DES JI LTAR NAD PA ZHES SOGS KYIS SEMS TZAM DU SMRA BA DRANG DON DU BSHAD PA BZHIN DU RTAG BRTAN GYI SNYING PO DRANG DON DU GSUNGS PAS KYANG DGONGS ‘GREL SOGS LAS KUN GZHI RNAM SHES GSUNGS PA SGRA JI BZHIN PA MIN PAR SGRUB PA YIN NO,,

That is, this part in the autocommentary is expressing the point that the statement “in the same way with people that are ill” can be used to show that—just as statements that things are mind only are explained as being metaphors—statements about a heart which is unchanging & firm are metaphoric.  And then it is for this reason that we can establish that statements in sources such as What I Really Meant about a foundation consciousness were never meant to be taken literally.


[2760]
DE LA NI THOG MAR SNYING PO BSTAN PA SGRA JI BZHIN PA MIN PAR SHES DGOS PAS, LANG GSHEGS LAS, MDO SDE {%SDE DE Kang} NI SEMS CAN GYI BSAM PA BZHIN BSTAN PA DON ‘KHRUL BA YIN TE, DE KHO NA’I GTAM MIN NO,,

For all this, we need to grasp first how those statements about a heart were not meant literally.  And so we go back to A Journey to Langka, where it says—

These words from scripture were taught only to fit the thinking of living beings; in actuality though they are mistaken, and were never meant to be taken as statements of the way things really are.


[2761]
DPER NA SMIG CHU NI CHUR MED PAS CHUR ZHEN PA’I RI DVAGS SLU BA BZHIN DU BSTAN PA’I CHOS KYANG BYIS PA MGU BAR BYED KYI, ‘PHAGS PA’I YE SHES RNAM PAR DGOD PA’I GTAM NI MIN NO,,

There is, for example, no water in a mirage; but still a wild animal who sees it will hold strongly to the idea that it is water.  Just so, there may be a teaching which was granted that pleases the infants, but which is talk that would never delight the wisdom of a realized being. 


[2762]
DES NA KHYOD KYIS DON GYI RJES SU ‘BRANG BAR BYA’I BRJOD PA LA CHAGS PAR MI BYA’O ZHES [f. 197b] BKA’ STZAL PA DANG, BLO GROS CHEN POS MDO SDE LAS DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I SNYING PO GSUNGS PA DE RANG BZHIN GYIS ‘OD GSAL BA THOG MA MED PA NAS RNAM PAR DAG PA MTSAN SO GNYIS DANG LDAN PA SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI LUS KYI NANG NA YOD PAR BRJOD DE,

Thus it was that you told us that we should follow after the meaning, and never be attached to the words.  And the ones of great wisdom have said that what was taught in the collection of sutras—what was described as the very heart of Those Gone Thus—is something possessed with the 32 marks of a total purity which has been possessed from time with no beginning, and is pure light in its very nature.  And they have stated that this is present within the bodies of every living being that there is.


[2763]
NOR BU RIN PO CHE GOS DRI MA CAN GYIS DKRIS PA BZHIN DU PHUNG KHAMS SKYE MCHED KYI GOS KYIS DKRIS SHING DRI MA CAN DU GYUR PA RTAG BRTAN THER ZUG TU BRJOD NA SNYING POR SMRA BA ‘DI MU STEGS KYI BDAG SMRA BA DANG JI LTAR MI ‘DRA BA LAGS ZHES ZHUS SO,,

But then there are those who come and ask how this kind of description by those who assert some very heart of things is in any way different from that of the River Schools, who say that everything has a self-nature.  Because what you are describing is something like a precious jewel that has laid wrapped up in a filthy cloth for some time—wrapped in the cloth of the heaps and categories and doors of sense—and thus taken on some kind of stench.  And then at the same time you are saying that it is unchanging, and stable, and solid.


[2764]
DE’I LAN DU DE LTAR BSTAN PA DE SGRA JI BZHIN PA MIN PAS MU STEGS KYI BDAG DANG MI ‘DRA ZHES ‘CHAD PA NA, GANG LA DGONGS NAS GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS GZHI NI STONG NYID DANG MTSAN MED DANG SMON MED NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA’O,,

In response we can say that teaching things as being like this was not something that was meant literally, and is therefore not at all the same as the self posited by the River Schools.  That is, what this description was meant to refer to—what was really meant—was the lack of any self-nature to things, in the form of emptiness; a lack of signs; and something beyond aspiration.


[2765]
DE LA DGONGS NAS GSUNGS PA’I DGOS PA NI BYIS PA RNAMS BDAG MED PAS ‘JIGS PA SPANG BA DANG, MU STEGS BYED BDAG TU SMRA BA LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PA RNAMS DANG, SNGON DE’I LTA BA LA GOMS PAR BYAS PA RNAMS DE KHO NA NYID LA RIM GYIS DRANG BA’I PHYIR DU

Why were these points then spoken of in terms of allusion?  First of all, the Buddha wished to prevent any trepidation that the infants might feel towards the concept that things are not themselves.  And he wanted to take those of the River Schools who were so attached to their profession of a self, and those who had, earlier, already accustomed themselves strongly to those ideas, and draw them out, gradually, to the idea of suchness.


[2766]
RTAG BRTAN THER ZUG GI SNYING PO YOD PAR BSTAN PAS ‘DI LA DA LTAR DANG MA ‘ONGS PA’I BYANG SEMS KYIS BDAG TU ZHEN PAR MI BYA BAR GSUNGS TE SGRAS ZIN LTAR GZUNG NA MU STEGS KYI BDAG LA ZHEN PA DANG ‘DRA BAS SGRA JI BZHIN PAR ZHEN PAR MI BYA BA’I DON NO,,

And so when we teach that there is a heart nature which is unchanging, stable, and solid, what we are really saying is that present and future bodhisattvas are not to feel any attachment to any self-nature here.  If we do take the description of the heart as being something meant literally, then it would indeed end up similar to the attachment that the River Schools have towards some kind of self-nature.  And so the point is that we need to avoid doing this.


[2767]
SGRA JI BZHIN PA DNGOS LA GNOD BYED NI SGRAS ZIN BZHIN KHAS LEN NA MU STEGS KYI BDAG DANG KHYAD PAR MED PAR ‘GYUR BA’O,,

When we say that taking something as literal hurts what is actual, what we mean is that—if we take these kinds of statements as literal—then what we end up with is something no different than the self-nature that the River Schools hold to.


[2768]
‘DI DAG GI DON RGYAS PAR GZHAN DU BSHAD ZIN PAS ‘DIR MA SPROS SO,,

I have already gone into great detail on these points elsewhere; so I will not expand upon them further here.


[2769]
‘GREL [f. 198a] PAR YANG DE NYID LAS, BLO GROS CHEN PO STONG PA NYID DANG MI SKYE BA DANG MI GNYIS PA DANG RANG BZHIN MED PA’I MTSAN NYID SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD KYI MDO SDE’I NANG DU CHUD PA ‘DI ZHES BSTAN TO ZHES DRANGS PA’I

In the autocommentary at this point we see the following words quoted—

In the same source we see, “O you of great wisdom, these ideas of emptiness itself; and of nothing starting; and of that which is beyond all two; and a quality of having no nature at all, were taught by all the Buddhas, and inserted into all of their sutras.”


[2770]
‘OG TU, DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR NA RNAM PA DE LTA BU’I MDO SDE RNAM PAR SHES PAR SMRA BA RNAMS KYIS NGES PA’I DON NYID DU KHAS BLANGS PA THAMS CAD DRANG PA’I DON NYID DU YIN PAR LUNG ‘DIS MNGON PAR GSAL BAR BYAS NAS ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And then just below that, we see it stated:

As such, we can then say that all such sutras that the Consciousness School assert to be something we should take literally are clearly shown, by this citation, to be exclusively statements that we should take as being figurative.


[2771]
RNAM PA DE LTA BU’I MDO SDE NI DRANGS MA THAG PA’I LANG GSHEGS KYI LUNG TSAN PA GNYIS MIN TE, DE GNYIS KA RNAM RIG PAS NGES DON DU KHAS MA BLANGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, SNGAR ‘GREL PAR DGONGS ‘GREL LA GSAL POR BSHAD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now the references from sutra referred to in these lines are not the two selections that we have just cited from the Journey to Langka, because neither of those would be accepted by the Mentalists as being intended literally; and the autocommentary has clearly referenced these, earlier, as referring to What I Really Meant.


[2772]
LUNG ‘DIS ZHES PA ‘GREL BSHAD LAS SA BCU PA’I MDO’I RTEN ‘BREL LA RTOG PA’I SKABS SU BYED PA PO BKAG PA LA ‘CHAD PA NI SHIN TU MI RIGS TE, BYED PA PO GZHAN BKAG PA NI SA BCU PA LAS SEMS TZAM MO ZHES GSUNGS PA’I TZAM GYI SGRAS PHYI ROL MI ‘GOG PA’I SHES BYED DU GSUNGS KYI, PHYI ROL BKAG PA DRANG DON DU STON PA’I SHES BYED MIN NO,,

Some people have explained the words here, “by this citation,” as referring to the section in the sutra on The Ten Levels where it examines dependence, and denies any agent.  This idea though is mistaken in the extreme.  When it is denying any other agent, the word “only” in the mention of “mind only” in The Ten Levels is stated as evidence that we are not denying things on the outside; it is not something meant as evidence in demonstrating that the denial of things on the outside was intended to be taken as figurative.


[2773]
DES NA RTZA BAR DRANG DON NYID DU LUNG ‘DIS GSAL BAR BYED CES PA’I LUNG LA GSUM LAS PHYI ROL BKAG PA’I SEMS TZAM DRANG DON DU STON PA NI JI LTAR NAD PA ZHES PA BZHI’O,,

As such, let us look at the line in the root text where it mentions “even more citations which these quotations explain to be taken metaphorically.”  There are three examples of the “citations”; one which shows us that “mind only” as a denial of things on the outside was meant metaphorically is the four lines [in the Tibetan; seven in the English] above which include “those who are ill.”


[2774]
KUN GZHI DRANG DON DU STON PA NI RTAG BRTAN GYI SNYING PO DRANG DON DU STON PA’I LUNG NGO,,

A case where foundation consciousness is shown to be meant metaphorically is the citation above that talked about an unchanging and stable heart of things being meant metaphorically.


[2775]
RTAG BRTAN GYI SNYING PO YOD PAR BSTAN PA DRANG DON YIN PAS KUN GZHI DRANG DON DU JI LTAR ‘GRUB CE NA,

“How is it,” one may ask then, “that foundation consciousness is proven to be meant in a figurative way, just because that teaching about the existence of a heart to things which is unchanging and stable was intended figuratively?”


[2776]
RGYAN STUG PO [f. 198b] BKOD PA LAS,
,SA RNAMS SNA TSOGS KUN GZHI STE,
,BDE GSHEGS SNYING PO DGE BA’ANG DE,
,SNYING PO DE LA KUN GZHI’I SGRAS,
,DE BZHIN GSHEGS RNAMS STON PAR MDZAD,
,SNYING PO KUN GZHIR BSGRAGS PA YANG,
,BLO GZHAN {%ZHAN} RNAMS KYIS MI SHES SO,,

In the sutra called The Paradise of the Clouds, we see the following—

The various levels
Are the foundation of all;

And the goodness
Which is the essence
Of Those Gone Thus

Is also a heart
Which the Ones Gone Thus

Have referred to
With the name,
“Foundation of all.”

And this essence
Which is known as the
Foundation of everything

Cannot be known
By any weaker
State of mind.


[2777]
ZHES GSUNGS SHING LANG GSHEGS LAS KYANG, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I SNYING PO KUN GZHI RNAM PAR SHES PAR BSGRAGS PA RNAM PAR SHES PA BDUN DANG BCAS PA ZHES DE GNYIS MING GI RNAM GRANGS SU LAN DU MAR GSUNGS SO{%,}

In A Journey to Langka we see as well mention of “the heart of the Ones Gone Thus; that which is known as the ‘foundation consciousness,’ along with the seven types of consciousness.”  That is, the two are spoken of as synonyms many times.


[2778]
DE YANG DE GNYIS GCIG RTAG LA GCIG MI RTAG PAR BSHAD PAS SGRAS ZIN GYI DON GNYIS GCIG TU BSTAN PA MIN YANG GANG LA BSAMS NAS SNYING PO BSTAN PA’I DON DE NYID LA DGONGS NAS KUN GZHI BSTAN PAS DGONGS PA’I DON LA LTOS TE MING GI RNAM GRANGS YIN PAS DON GCIG GO

But now of these two, one is explained as being unchanging; and the other as being changing.  As such, it is not literally the case that the two connotations are being described as the same.  But if we look at the intention of the terms here, we can say that they are both meant to convey the idea of something essential.  And so when the term “foundation of everything” is used, the two are meant synonymously with reference to their intention—and as such, we can say they refer to the same thing.


[2779]
,DE LTAR NA SNGA MA DRANG DON DU BSTAN PA NYID KYIS PHYI MA YANG DRANG DON DU ‘GRUB BO,,

As such, we can say that—since the former is explained as being meant figuratively—the latter is established as being figurative as well.


[2780]
‘GREL PA LAS, DNGOS PO THAMS CAD KYI RANG BZHIN GYI RJES SU ZHUGS PA’I PHYIR STONG PA NYID KHO NA KUN GZHI RNAM PAR SHES PA’I SGRAS BSTAN PAR RIG PAR BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS LA,

The autocommentary puts it this way:

You should understand that—since it follows upon the nature of every existing entity—it is emptiness alone which is indicated with the term, “foundation consciousness.”


[2781]
‘DI DANG RTAG BRTAN SOGS KYI SNYING PO DRANG DON DU BSTAN PA GNYIS LEGS PAR BSGRIGS NAS LUNG DES KUN GZHI DRANG DON DU BSTAN PA RTOGS DGOS PAR YOD DO,,

And so you have to set these two forth properly—demonstrating that this and that heart of things which is unchanging and stable were both meant figuratively; you need to come to the realization that this reference is stating that the idea of a foundation to everything is meant figuratively.


[2782]
BLO GROS CHEN PO STONG PA NYID DANG ZHES PA NAS CHUD PA ‘DI ZHES PA’I MJUG THOGS SU MDO NYID LAS, ‘DI NI MDO SDE GANG DU YANG RUNG STE, DE DAG TU DON ‘DI NYID KHONG DU CHUD PAR BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA NI NGO BO NYID DANG PO GNYIS LA RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS [f. 199a] YOD MED KYI KHYAD PAR PHYE BA DRANG DON DU STON PA’I LUNG NGO,,

The very same sutra continues with the following words, just after that section that starts with “O you of great wisdom, these ideas of emptiness itself…” and continues down to “…inserted into all of their sutras.”  It says, “You should come to understand the meaning in those to be this very same one.”  This then is a reference which is indicating that making the distinction between the first two kinds of essential nature as things that exist by definition or not was itself something that was meant figuratively.



Figurative by logic

[2783]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: showing how logic takes these statements as figurative.


[2784]
DA NI RIGS PAS SEMS TZAM GSUNGS PA DRANG DON DU GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

And so now let us present an explanation which will clarify how we establish—by using logic—the fact that statements about “mind only” were intended only in a figurative way.


[2785]
DE LA BSOD NAMS BSAGS PA RNAMS CHOS NYID LA BDE BLAG TU ‘JUG PA’I THABS SU JI LTAR THOG MAR SBYIN SOGS KYI GTAM SBYOR BAR MDZAD PA DE BZHIN DU ZAB MO’I DON RDZOGS PA THOG MA NAS RTOGS PAR MI NUS PA’I GDUL BYA RNAMS SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS RIM GYIS RANG BZHIN MED PA RTOGS PA LA ‘DZUD PAR MDZAD DO,,

Now accumulating merit is the method for engaging, with ease, in the very nature of things.  Thus it was then that the Buddha first introduced students to descriptions of giving and the like.  In the same way, there are certain disciples who would not be capable, from the very start, of grasping in its entirety the import of that most subtle of all objects.  People like this then the Buddhas lead into the realization of how nothing has any nature of its own, by going step by step.


	[2786]
[VI.96]
Jñeyaṃ vinā jñāna nirākṛtiś ca
labhyā sukheneti vadanti Buddhāḥ,
Jñeyasya pūrvaṃ pratiṣedham eva
jñeye’sati jñāna niṣedha siddheḥ.

,SHES BYA MED NA SHES PA BSAL BA NI,
,BDE BLAG RNYED CES SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS GSUNGS,
,SHES BYA MED NA SHES PA BKAG ‘GRUB PAS,
,DANG POR SHES BYA DGAG PA MDZAD PA YIN,

		The Buddhas
		Have stated that
		If no objects exist,

		And then we
Clear away
The idea of a
State of mind,

		Then people can
		Come to this idea
		More easily.

		If there are no
		Objects of knowledge,

		We can deny
		Any perception,
		And establish that.

		Therefore
		At the beginning
		We focus on denying
		Objects of knowledge.


[2787]
DE ‘DRA BA LA SNGON DU SHES BYA PHYI ROL LA MED PA BSTAN NA, DE’I ‘OG TU SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA GSAL BA NI, BDE BLAG TU RNYED CES SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS GSUNGS SO,,

And so the Buddhas have stated that if, before we take such a step, we teach people that no objects exist on the outside—and only after that clear away the idea of any state of mind which could exist through some nature of its own—then they can come to this idea more easily.


[2788]
DE LTAR NA SHES BYA MED PA STE THOG MAR PHYI ROL BKAG PA YANG BDAG MED RDZOGS PAR RTOGS PA’I THABS YIN PA’I PHYIR,

As such, we can say that teaching people that there exist no objects of knowledge—denying, at the start, that there are any outer objects—was a strategy for helping these individuals to grasp the lack of a self-nature to things, in its entirety.


[2789]
SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS DANG POR SHES BYA PHYI ROL DGAG PAR MDZAD PA KHO NA GSUNGS PA YIN TE SHES BYA MED NA STE PHYI ROL GYI BDAG MED PA RIG PA RNAMS SHES PA BKAG PA STE DE’I BDAG MED PA BDE BLAG TU ‘GRUB PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Thus it is then that the Buddhas say things, at the beginning, which focus only on denying the existence of outer objects of knowledge.  And that’s because—if there are no objects of knowledge—then we can go on to deny any perception or knowledge of what on the outside lacks any self-nature, and thus easily establish that lack of a self-nature to things.


[2790]
PHYI ROL RANG BZHIN MED PAR RIG PA RNAMS KYIS NI SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PAR RES ‘GA’ RANG KHO NAS RTOGS LA, RES ‘GA’ NI GZHAN GYIS CUNG ZAD BSTAN PA TZAM GYIS RTOGS SO,,

Those who understand that things on the outside have no nature of their own can, in selected cases, come to the realization that the mind cannot exist through any nature of its own.  Other types of people come to realize the same thing only after receiving some small amount of explanation from others.


[2791]
PHYI ROL MED PA DANG SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA DRANG DON YIN PAR NI BYANG CHUB SEMS ‘GREL LAS GSAL BAR GSUNGS TE,
,’DI DAG THAMS CAD SEMS TZAM ZHES,
,THUB PA YIS NI GANG GSUNGS PA,
,BYIS RNAMS SKRAG PA SPANG DON [f. 199b] TE,
,DE NI DE BZHIN NYID MA YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS SHING,

The fact that the ideas that nothing exists on the outside, and that the mind could exist through some nature of its own, were only meant figuratively is clearly expressed in A Commentary on the Wish for Enlightenment:

The Able One stated
That all of this
Was only the mind;

But this was only meant
To help the infants
Abandon their fear,

And was not meant
The way it was stated.


[2792]
‘PHAGS PA LHAS KYANG YE SHES SNYING PO KUN LAS BTUS LAS GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

Master Aryadeva also speaks of these things clearly in his Compendium of the Essence of Wisdom.



Distinguishing the figurative
from the literal

[2793]
GNYIS PA NI,

With this we have reached our second major section from above, which is showing the way in which we can understand which points in sutra are meant figuratively, and which meant literally.


	[2794]
[VI.97]
Evaṃ jñātvā prakriyām āgamasya
vyākhyātārthaṃ yac ca neyārtham uktam,
Sūtraṃ buddhvā nīyatāṃ yan na tattvaṃ
nītārthaṃ ca jñāyatāṃ śūnyatārtham.

,DE LTAR LUNG GI LO RGYUS SHES BYAS TE,
,MDO GANG DE NYID MA YIN BSHAD DON CAN,
,DRANG DON GSUNGS PA’ANG RTOGS
NAS [209a] DRANG BYA ZHING,
,STONG NYID DON CAN NGES DON SHES PAR GYIS,

		That is, we should
		Come to know
		The whole story
		Of the scriptures.

		There are certain sutras
		Which contain ideas
		That explain something
		Other than suchness.

		They were taught
		In a figurative way;
		We should realize that,
		And interpret them [f. 209a].

		And any which conveys
		The idea of emptiness
		Should be understood
		As something
		To be taken literally.


[2795]
SHES RAB CAN DAG GIS DE NYID RDZOGS PAR DNGOS SU MI STON PA’I DRANG DON GYI MDO GZHAN YANG DE BZHIN DU BSTAN PAR BYA’O ZHES BSHAD PA, 

The following lines are meant to say, “Those of you possessed of wisdom should explain the other sutras—those that have to be interpreted, those that teach suchness neither in its entirety, or directly—in the very same way.”


[2796]
SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR LUNG GI DRANG NGES KYI LO RGYUS TE RNAM GZHAG SHES PAR BYAS TE, MDO SDE GANG DAG DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON MA YIN PA BSHAD PA’I DON CAN TE BRJOD BYA CAN,

That is, first of all we should come to know the whole story—that is, the entire treatment—of which scriptures thus are meant literally, and which figuratively.  And so there are certain groups of sutras which contain ideas, subject matter that explain something other than sheer suchness.  Let’s consider the topics that these sutras discuss.


[2797]
SKYE BA MED PA LA SOGS PAS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA’I RTEN ‘BYUNG DNGOS SU GSAL BAR MI BYED PA’I DRANG DON GSUNGS PA’ANG DRANG DON DU RTOGS PAR BYAS NAS DRANG BAR BYA ZHING STE, JI LTAR RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PA RTOGS PA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR BA DE LTAR BSHAD PAR BYA STE,

They were taught in a figurative way, where they clarify—directly—the topic of dependence characterized by things never starting, or the like.  And we should come first to realize that they were spoken figuratively; and then we should interpret them as necessary.  That is, these teachings are meant to be explained in a manner which would serve as a cause for entering the concept that there is nothing which exists through some nature of its own.


[2798]
‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PAR BSTOD PA LAS,
,’BYUNG RNAMS MIG GZUGS MA YIN NA,
,DE ‘BYUNG MIG GZUNG JI LTAR ZHES,
,GZUGS LA DE SKAD GSUNGS PA NA,
,KHYOD KYIS GZUGS KYI ‘DZIN PA BZLOG
,CES GSUNGS LA,

As A Praise of the One Who Went Beyond the World puts it,

	If the elements
	Are not form
	That the eye ever sees,

	Then how can you
	Even talk about
	Their occurrence
	Being held by the eye?

	Because when you talk
	About form in the way
	That you have,

	You deny that there
	Is anything at all
	Which could hold
	To that form.


[2799]
MDO LAS KYANG, MI RTAG DON NI MED DON ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

We also see lines in sutra itself which say, “The meaning of changing is that things do not exist.”


[2800]
LUNG SNGA MA SHES BYED DU ‘GRO TSUL NI BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS CHOS MNGON PAR, ‘BYUNG BA BZHI MIG GI YUL MIN PA’I REG BYA DANG, DE LAS BYUNG BA’I ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR GYI GZUGS KYI SKYE MCHED MIG GI GZUNG BYAR GSUNGS LA,

Now how does the previous citation serve as support for the idea here?  The Conqueror has made the following statement in the teachings on higher knowledge:

The four elements consist of tangible entities which cannot serve as objects of the eye.  Those examples of the door of sense of form though which are products of the elements are objects which the eye can hold.


[2801]
DE GNYIS KA KHAS BLANG DGOS PA LA DE DAG GI DE KHO NA NYID STON PA NA DE RNAMS RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB NA ‘BYUNG BA MIG GI GZUNG BYA’AM, YANG NA YUL GZUGS MIG GI GZUNG BYA MIN [f. 200a] PAR KHAS BLANG DGOS PAR

In fact we have to accept both of these; but when we teach the suchness that they possess, we would have to say that—if they existed through some nature of their own—then we would have to accept that the elements were something that the eye could grasp; or else that the object of form were not something that the eye could grasp.


[2802]
SHES PA NA BSHAD TSUL SNGA MA DE RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID STON PA MIN PAR SHES NAS DE KHO NA NYID GSAR DU RTOGS PA DANG, BSHAD TSUL SNGA MA DE LA ‘JUG PA’I THABS SU GSUNGS PAR SHES PA’O,,

If we understand this point, then we would understand that those previous ways of explaining things were not teaching suchness.  And then we would perceive suchness in a fresh way; and we would understand that the previous way of explaining things was just presenting a method of engaging in that understanding.


[2803]
LUNG GNYIS PA’I DON NI SNGA MA BZHIN DU DNGOS PO RNAMS SKYE BA DANG, ‘JIG PAR BSTAN PA NI RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PA’I DON DU YIN PAR GO BA’O,,

The meaning of the second citation can be understood as similar to the earlier one; that is to say, as indicating that teaching a starting and a stopping to things was meant in the sense of things that did not exist through any nature of their own.


[2804]
MDO GANG LAS GANG ZAG DANG CHOS RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG PA NYID KYI DON CAN TE DNGOS SU BRJOD PAR BYED PA CAN DE NGES PA’I DON DU SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

And you should understand that any sutra which conveys the idea—which is to say, serves to relate directly—that the person, and things in general, are completely empty of any nature of their own, should be understood as being a sutra which is to be taken literally.


[2805]
,DE LTAR YANG TING NGE ‘DZIN RGYAL PO LAS,
,STONG PA BDE BAR GSHEGS PAS BSHAD PA LTAR,
,NGES DON MDO SDE DAG GI BYE BRAG SHES,
,GANG LAS SEMS CAN GANG ZAG SKYES BU BSTAN,
,CHOS DE THAMS CAD DRANG BA’I DON DU SHES,

The King of Concentration sutra puts it the same way—

You should understand
That explaining emptiness
As it was done by the ones
Who have Gone to Bliss

Is a feature of those sutras
Which were meant as literal.

All of those teachings
In which living beings
And the person
And the individual
Were taught should be

Understood as being
Intended only figuratively.


[2806]
ZHES GSUNGS TE MDO SDE DAG GI BYE BRAG NI DRANG DON GYI MDO SDE DANG MI ‘DRA BA’I KHYAD PAR RO,,

When they speak of a “feature of those sutras” here, what they are referring to is a characteristic which sets them apart from the sutras which are to be taken figuratively.


[2807]
GANG ZAG BSTAN PA NI MTSON PA TZAM STE BYED PA PO DANG, LAS SU BYA BA DANG BYED PA RNAMS YOD PAR STON PA’O,,

And when they mention “the person” here it is only in a representative way; we can also say it refers to those sutras that speak about the agent of an action; the object of the action; or the action itself.


[2808]
‘DI NI MDO SDE LA DRANG NGES GNYIS SU ‘JOG TSUL GYI KHUNGS SO,,

This citation is in fact the ultimate source for separating the body of sutras into those two types: the ones which are figurative, and the ones which are literal.


[2809]
YANG DE NYID LAS,
,’JIG RTEN KHAMS NI STONG PHRAG TU,
,NGA YIS CHOS RNAMS GANG GSUNGS PA,
,YI GE THA DAD DON GCIG STE,
,YONGS SU BSGRAG PAR NUS MA YIN,

The same source also says—

	The teachings
	That I have given
	In all the worlds there are

	Are presented 
	In separate words
	With but a single meaning:

	They are not something
	Which someone else
	Could spread.


	[2810]
,DNGOS PO GCIG NI BSAM BYAS NA,
,DE DAG THAMS CAD BSGOMS ‘GYUR TE,
,SANGS RGYAS KUN GYIS CHOS MANG PO,
,JI SNYED RAB TU BSTAN PA RNAMS,

If you really think
About a single entity,
Then you are meditating
On all those that exist.

And so consider now
All of the many teachings
That all of the Enlightened Ones
Have worked so hard to give;


	[2811]
,CHOS RNAMS KUN GYI BDAG MED YIN,
,MI GANG DON LA MKHAS RNAMS KYIS,
,GNAS ‘DI LA NI BSLAB BYAS NA,
,SANGS RGYAS CHOS RNAMS [f. 200b] RNYED MI DKA’, 
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

	They consist of the lack
	Of a self, to any
	Of all the things there are.

	Those who are wise
	In the real meaning of things
	Should educate themselves
	In this single way of things;

	For them, it is
	Nothing difficult at all
	To find the teachings
	Of the Buddha.


[2812]
‘JIG RTEN ZHES PA’I RKANG PA BZHI NI MDO SDE JI SNYED CIG GSUNGS PA LA DON DAM PA DNGOS SU GSAL BAR BYED PA NI DE BZHIN NYID LA DNGOS SU GZHOL LA, DE LTAR MI STON PA’I DRANG DON RNAMS KYANG BRGYUD NAS DE BZHIN NYID LA GZHOL BAS, DON DAM LA GZHOL BAR DON GCIG PA’O,,

The four lines [in the Tibetan, nine in the English] which include “all the worlds” are meant to say that all of the sutras ever spoken in order to clarify, directly, the ultimate—however many such sutras there may be—flow directly into suchness.  And even those which don’t teach things this way—that is, all the sutras that were meant figuratively—also flow down indirectly to reach the very same place, of suchness.  As such, all sutras in the universe teach the same thing, since they all flow down into ultimate reality.


[2813]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS NA MDO SDE YOD TSAD LAM LA SLOB PA’I LAS DANG PO PAS RTZAD GCAD PAR MI NUS PAS MDO SDE GANG YIN PA GCIG GI DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON RTZAD GCAD CES PA YIN TE,

As such, we can say these lines are speaking to us as follows.  There is no person who is just starting out in their study of the path who could ever seek out the total amount of sutras that exist in this world.  As such, we should do our best to seek out just the meaning of suchness as it is presented in any one of these sutras.


[2814]
DE KHO NA NYID DNGOS SU MI STON PA RNAMS KYANG DE LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYUR BSHAD DGOS PA’I SHES BYED DU DRANGS PAS SHES SO,,

This is a point that you should understand because I have cited this sutra as support for the idea that even those sutras which do not convey suchness directly must be explained as providing the basis for us to enter into that same thing.


[2815]
DNGOS PO GCIG NI ZHES PA GNYIS NI CHOS CAN GCIG GI DE KHO NA NYID LEGS PAR SHES NAS BSGOMS NA CHOS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DE KHO NA NYID BSGOMS PAR ‘GRO BAS CHOS CAN RE RE NAS KYI CHOS NYID SO SOR SGOM MI DGOS PA’I DON NO,,

The two references to a single entity convey the fact that if we really understand the suchness of a single typical thing, and then meditate upon this understanding, then it will turn into a meditation upon the suchness of all the things there are.  The point here is that it won’t be necessary for us to meditate, individually, on the ultimate nature of each and every representative object.


[2816]
DNGOS PO GCIG BSGOMS NA THAMS CAD BSGOMS PAR ‘GYUR BA DE GANG YIN PA STON PA NI SANGS RGYAS KUN GYIS ZHES PA GSUM GYIS STON TE, DE LTAR GSUNGS PA NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED YIN ZHES PAS, CHOS CAN RGYA CHE BA’I SPYOD PHYOGS RNAMS LA GCIG GIS CHOG ZER BA MIN NO,,

How is this fact expressed, that by meditating on a single entity we begin to meditate on all those that there are?  It is expressed by the three lines [in the Tibetan, seven lines in the English] which begin with “and so consider now.”  This is all a reference to the lack of a self-nature to things; as such, it is not the case that the lines are saying that when we are dealing with a broad number of examples, just one of them would be sufficient.


[2817]
ZLA BA SGRON MA LAS, GRANGS NGES SU ‘JOG TSUL GSUNGS PA DE BZHIN DU BLO GROS MI ZAD PA LA SOGS PA’I MDO SDE DAG LAS RGYA CHER BSTAN PA YANG RTOGS PAR BYA ZHES GSUNGS TE, ‘DI RNAMS MTHA’ CHOD PAR DRANG NGES RNAM ‘BYED DU BSHAD ZIN TO,,

We are advised to “glean our understanding from how the Lamp of the Moon describes the manner of deciding what is literal, and what is figurative, as well as from the extensive presentation in sutras such as Never-Ending Wisdom.”  I have already given a definitive explanation of these points in my Distinguishing the Figurative from the Literal.


[2818]
PHYOGS TZAM ZHIG NI BRJOD PAR BYA STE ZHES PA NI DGONGS [f. 201a] ‘GREL LAS NGO BO NYID GSUM BSHAD PA DRANG DON DU ‘GREL NA RANG LUGS KYIS DE GSUM GYI ‘JOG TSUL JI LTAR YIN SNYAM PA LA DE’I PHYOGS TZAM STON PA’O,,

At this point in the autocommentary we see “I will explain this just a touch.”  What this is saying is that Master Chandrakirti intends to speak just a bit about the following question: If we explain the presentation of the three essential natures in What I Really Meant as something to be taken figuratively, then how does our own system present these same three?


[2819]
DPER NA SBRUL NI THAG PA BSDOGS PA’I RTEN ‘BREL LA LOG PAR BTAGS PA YIN TE SBRUL DE THAG PA DE LA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Let’s consider for example a case where there is a mistaken appellation, for the connection between a rope and a snake; that is, there is absolutely no snake there amidst the rope.


[2820]
SBRUL DNGOS LA NI YONGS SU GRUB PA YIN TE MED BZHIN DU KUN TU MA BTAGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

A genuine snake is something we could call “totality”—“completely established”—in the sense that it is in no way just called what it is, without being there at all.


[2821]
DE BZHIN DU RANG BZHIN GSHIS LUGS KYANG GZHAN DBANG ‘DUS BYAS LA NI DER MED BZHIN DU KUN TU BTAGS PA YIN TE,

In the same way, some original nature to things is something simply ascribed to dominated entities—productions of causes; whereas in truth there is no such thing there at all.


[2822]
RTZA SHE LAS,
,RANG BZHIN DAG NI BCOS MIN DANG,
,GZHAN LA LTOS PA MED PA YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS PAS GSHIS LUGS KYI NGO BO NYID NI BYAS PA CAN MA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Wisdom puts it this way—

	Natures to things
	Could never be artifice;

	There can be no dependence
	Upon other things.

What this is saying is that an essence to things that was their original nature could never be something that was made.


[2823]
BZUNG BZHIN PA STE MTHONG BZHIN PA’I RTEN ‘BREL BYAS PA CAN GZUGS BRNYAN DANG ‘DRA BA LA GSHIS SU KUN BTAGS PA’I RANG BZHIN DE NI SANGS RGYAS KYI JI LTA BA GZIGS PA’I SPYOD YUL LA NI GSHIS LUGS DNGOS YIN TE,

And so let’s consider something that we were in the act of holding; which is to say, a dependence which we could observe—something made—which was similar then to a reflection in a mirror.  The original condition here of having a nature of being ascribed, as the object of activity for the way that a Buddha sees how things exist, is the actual original nature of things.


[2824]
DER NI MED BZHIN DU KUN TU MA BTAGS PA’I PHYIR TE, DNGOS PO RGYU RKYEN GYIS BYAS PA CAN LA YE SHES DES MA REG PAR RANG BZHIN ‘BA’ ZHIG MNGON SUM DU MDZAD PAS DE NYID THUGS SU CHUD PA’I PHYIR SANGS RGYAS ZHES BRJOD DE, ,MA REG PA’I MTHA’ BCAD PA NI ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

This is not something that is not at all ascribed even as it has no existence; for in fact we call a being “enlightened” when they comprehend suchness only as a nature of things which is perceived directly, without their wisdom ever making contact with entities which were produced by causes & conditions.  Where we draw the line with this “not making contact,” by the way, is something we will cover further on.


[2825]
DE’I PHYIR DE LTAR NGO BO NYID GSUM GYI RNAM GZHAG RTOGS PAR BYAS NAS MDO’I DGONGS PA BSHAD PAR BYA’O ZHES GSUNGS TE, BSHAD TSUL DES BYAMS ZHUS KYI LE’UR MTSAN NYID GSUM BSHAD PA’I DGONGS PA YANG SHES PAR BYAS LA, ,DGONGS [f. 201b] ‘GREL GYI NGO BO NYID GSUM BSHAD PA’I DGONGS PA DRANG DON YIN PA YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Such it is then that we see, “I will make an explanation of the actual intent of the sutra, now that we have grasped the presentation of three essential natures in this way.”  From the way this explanation is made then we can as well understand the true intent of the explanation of the three defining characteristics in the Section Requested by Loving One.  And then we can also come to an understanding of how the true intent of the three essential natures taught in What I Really Meant was that they were only metaphoric.


[2826]
SEMS TZAM PAS GDAGS GZHI GZHAN DBANG LA GZUNG ‘DZIN NGO BO THA DAD PA GNYIS SU BTAGS PA KUN BRTAGS SU BYED PA NI BSAM PA’AM BRTAG PAR BYA DGOS TE, GZUNG ‘DZIN GNYIS NI GZHAN DBANG YIN GYI DE MIN PA’I GZHAN DBANG NI DNGOS POR MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Those of the Mind Only school ascribe separate essences of held and holder to the object of their ascription: dominated entities.  We need to think about—or examine—this form of conceiving of things; that is, the two of what is held and what does the holding are dominated entities; but in actual fact there is no kind of dominated entity which is other than these.


[2827]
BYAMS ZHUS NAS BSHAD PA’I NGO BO NYID GSUM DANG DGONGS ‘GREL GYI NGO BO NYID GSUM GYI RNAM GZHAG MTHA’ CHOD PAR NI DRANG NGES RNAM ‘BYED DU BSHAD ZIN TO,,

I have already made a definitive presentation, in Distinguishing the Figurative from the Literal, of the three essential natures found in the Section Requested by Loving One, and the three essential natures from What I Really Meant.



Denying things from themselves & other

[2828]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us then to our third major step from before: denying that things could grow both from themselves and from something other than themselves.


[2829]
DE LA BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA’I TSIG GAL GNYIS SU SMRA BA GCER BU PA RNAMS NI ‘JI BA’I GONG BU DANG DBYU GU DANG ‘KHOR LO DANG SKUD PA DANG CHU DANG RDZA MKHAN LA SOGS PA DAG LAS BUM PA ‘BYUNG BA NA,

Now on all this there is a position taken by the Naked Ones where they make an assertion of two contradictory statements, saying that things arise from both themselves and from something other than themselves.  They would start by noting that a pitcher comes from a lump of clay; the shaping stick; the wheel; a measuring thread; water; the potter, and other such things.


[2830]
RDZA BUM ‘JI BA’I BDAG NYID DU YOD PA KHO NA SKYE BA DE’I PHYIR BDAG LAS SKYE LA, RDZA MKHAN GYI BYA BA LA SOGS PA GZHAN DU GYUR PA DAG RDZA BUM GYI SKYED PAR BYED PA YIN PA’I PHYIR, GZHAN LAS KYANG SKYE BAR SEMS SO,,

They would say that since the pitcher itself has been made exclusively of clay, it has grown from itself.  And then again, the actions of the potter and so on—things other than the pitcher—have acted to produce it; and so as such, they would consider the vessel to have arisen from something other than itself as well.


[2831]
PHYI ROL LA JI LTA BA DE BZHIN DU NANG LA YANG BDAG DANG GZHAN GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And they would say that—since the inside is similar to what’s going on on the outside—then it too must have arisen from both the pitcher itself, and something else as well.


[2832]
DE LA GANG ZAG DANG BDAG GCES PA’I SROG DANG, DBANG PO LA SOGS PA SROG MA YIN PA DANG, MNGON MTHO DANG NGES LEGS ‘GRUB PA’I CHOS DANG, DE LAS BZLOG PA’I CHOS MIN PA DANG, NYON MONGS PA’I ZAG PA DANG ‘CHAL KHRIMS ‘GOG PA’I SDOM PA DANG, LA SOGS PAS BDE BA DANG, SDUG BSNGAL BA DANG, SHES PA LAS SKYES SHING SHES PA’I RGYUR GYUR PA’I ‘DU BYA BA’I SHUGS TE, TSIG GI DON [f. 202a] DGU’I RNAM GZHAG BYAS NAS

They set forth nine different principles, which involve the person and the life which is cherished by the self; those things which are not the life, such as the powers and so forth; the teachings which help us achieve the higher rebirths and definite goodness; the opposite of these teachings, negative teachings; the impurities of the negativities; the commitments which help prevent immoral behavior; and “so on”—which would include pleasure, pain, the power that brings things together born from mind and supplying the causes for mind.


[2833]
BYAMS PA TSE RABS GZHAN DU YANG SROG GI BDAG NYID DU YOD PA KHO NAS DA LTAR GYI SKYE BA ‘DI LEN PA’I PHYIR BDAG LAS SKYE STE, BYAMS PA DANG SROG GNYIS GZHAN MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Someone like John, when he passes on to his other lifetimes, takes on these births exclusively as the same entity of an individual which is alive; as such, he arises from himself.  Here, the pair John and his life are not considered different from one another.


[2834]
SROG NI SKYE BA GCIG NAS GCIG TU ‘GRO BA DANG LDAN PA’I PHYIR, LHA LA SOGS PA’I ‘GRO BAR RGYU BA YANG GZHAN GYIS ‘DOD DO,,

Life involves passing on from one rebirth to another; and so when it courses into births such as a worldly god or the like, it is—they say—by means of something which is other.


[2835]
YANG BYAMS PA RANG GI PHA DANG MA DANG, CHOS DANG CHOS MA YIN PA DANG, ZAG PA LA SOGS PA GZHAN DU GYUR PA LAS SKYE BA’I PHYIR GZHAN LAS KYANG SKYE’O,,

They would also say that John has arisen from things other than him: things like his father and mother; or from good teachings or bad teachings; or from impurity or other things of the like.  And so as such, he has arisen too from something other than himself.


	[2836]
[VI.98]
Dvābhyāṃ na cāpi jananaṃ khalu yukta rūpaṃ
doṣāḥ patanti vihitās tuta eva yasmāt,
Na lokato’pi na ca tattvata iṣṭam etad
ekaikato na jananasya yato’sti siddhiḥ.

,GNYIS LAS SKYE BA’ANG RIGS PA’I NGO BO
MA YIN GANG GI PHYIR,
,BSHAD ZIN NYES PA DE DAG THOG TU
‘BAB PA YIN PHYIR RO,
,’DI NI ‘JIG RTEN LAS MIN DE NYID
DU YANG ‘DOD MIN TE,
,GANG PHYIR RE RE LAS NI SKYE BA
‘GRUB PA YOD MA YIN,

		It is also not the nature
		Of clear thinking
		To say that things
		Could arise from
		A combination.

		Why is that?
		Because those same
		Problems already raised
		Would strike
		Like lightning.

		From the point
		Of the everyday world
		There are none;

		And speaking as well
		From the point of view
		Of suchness,

		Neither is this idea
		Something that
		We can accept.

		The reason
		That this is true
		Is that there
		Is no such thing

		As an arising
		Accomplished separately.


[2837]
DE’I PHYIR BDAG GZHAN RE RE KHO NA LAS SKYE BAR KHAS MI LEN PAS SNGAR BDAG GZHAN RE RE BA LAS SKYE BA BKAG PA NI KHO BO CAG LA MI GNOD DO ZHE NA,

And so this other group would say,

It is not in fact the case that we accept the idea that things arise either from themselves or from others; as such, your previous denial of these two separately—that things could arise from themselves, or from other things—does no damage to our position.


[2838]
RE RE BA LAS SKYE BA MI RIGS PAR MA ZAD RANG GZHAN GNYIS KA TSOGS PA LAS SKYE BA’ANG RIGS PA’I NGO BO MA YIN TE, GANG GI PHYIR NA SNGAR RE RE BA LA BSHAD ZIN PA’I NYES PA DE DAG GNYIS CHAR LAS SKYE BA’I PHYOGS LA YANG THOG TU ‘BAB PA NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR TE,

Not only is it illogical to say that things could arise from either one of the two separately; it is also not the nature of clear thinking to say that things could arise from some combination of the two, of themselves and other things.  And why is that?  Because those same problems that we have already raised with each of the two possibilities separately would quite certainly strike like lightning itself to the position that things could arise from both together.


[2839]
BYAMS PA SROG LA LTOS TE BDAG LAS SKYE BAR ‘DOD NA NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SKYE BA DON MED SOGS KYIS DGAG LA, PHA MA SOGS LA LTOS TE GZHAN SKYE ‘DOD NA NI, HA CANG THAL BA SOGS KYIS DGAG GO

First of all, the position that John is born from himself because he depends upon the power of life was already denied previously, in the discussion of how such a starting would be pointless.  And saying that one has arisen from something other than oneself, if they have arisen in dependence upon parents or the like, was already denied by showing that it had unacceptable, extreme implications.


[2840]
,GONG DU JI LTAR BDAG DANG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB DANG, DON DAM PAR YANG MI RIGS SO ZHES BSTAN PA DE BZHIN DU ‘DIR YANG GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA MI SRID DO ZHES MJUG BSDU BA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA, BDAG GZHAN GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA ‘DI NI ‘JIG RTEN LAS KYANG YOD PA MIN LA, DE NYID DON DAM DU YANG ‘DOD PA MIN NO,,

Earlier on, we showed that it was illogical to say that things had arisen either from themselves or from something other than themselves, from both the point of view of the deceptive nature of the everyday world, and ultimately speaking as well.  In the same way, at this particular point in the text, our author presents a final conclusion to say that—first of all—from the point of the everday world there can exist none of this arising of things from both themselves and from things other than themselves.  And speaking as well from the point of view of the ultimate suchness of things, neither is this idea something that we can accept.


[2841]
GANG GI PHYIR BDAG GZHAN RE RE LAS [f. 202b] NI SKYE BA ‘GRUB PA YOD PA MA YIN PAS GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA YANG RIGS PA MA YIN NO,,

The reason that this is true is that there is no such thing as an arising of things which is accomplished separately, either from the thing itself, or from things other than itself.  As such, it would be illogical then to say that something could arise from both together.



And never with no cause

[2842]
BZHI PA NI,

Which brings us to our fourth step from before: denying that things could grow without any cause at all.


[2843]
‘DIR NGO BO NYID LAS BYUNG BAR SMRA BA RGYANG PHAN PA NI, GAL TE SKYE BA RGYU LAS YIN NA ‘BRAS BU LA LTOS TE BDAG DANG GZHAN DANG GNYIS KAR GYUR PA ZHIG TU SKYE BAS SKYON DE DAG TU ‘GYUR NA BDAG GIS NI RGYU LAS SKYE BAR KHAS MA BLANGS PAS PHYOGS GSUM GA LA BSHAD PA’I NYES PA MED DE,

The non-Buddhist school named “The Outcasts” claims that things happen through some essence of their own.  They would say that—since the arising of something occurs through a cause—then from the point of view of the result, there has been an arising from itself; from something other than itself; and from both.  And they would say that "If the problems raised before apply here, then we refuse to accept that the result arises from a cause at all; and therefore we incur none of the faults you have raised with all three possibilities.”


[2844]
‘DI LTAR PAD+MA’I CHU BA DANG DE’I ‘DAB MA RNAMS KYI RTZUB PA DANG ‘JAM SHA DAG ‘GA’ ZHIG GIS BYED PAR MA MTHONG LA, DE’I ‘DAB MA DANG ZE’U ‘BRU DANG LTE BA RNAMS KYI KHA DOG DANG DBYIBS SNA TSOGS PA DAG BYED PAR MA MTHONG NGO,,

Here’s why we would say that.  Consider the stem of a lotus flower, and its petals.  One is scratchy, but the other is very soft.  But no one ever saw something that made them so.  No one has ever seen anybody who sat down and crafted the petals of the lotus, and the anthers, and the center; the various hues and curves.


[2845]
DE BZHIN DU PA NA SA DANG BAL PO SE’U LA SOGS PA’I SNA TSOGS PA YANG YIN NO,,

And the whole variety of things like the jackfruit, and the pomegranate, are just the same.


[2846]
DE LTAR PHYI ROL LA BZHIN DU RMA BYA DANG BYA TI TI RI DANG BYA GAG LA SOGS PA NANG GI BDAG NYID CAN DAG LA YANG ‘GA’ ZHIG GIS ‘BAD PAS GZUNG NAS KHA DOG DANG DBYIBS LA SOGS PA ‘GOD PAR MI DMIGS SO,,

And in the same manner then with the inanimate world, we see this with the animate: with things like the peacock, and the partridge, and the duck.  Nobody ever saw somebody come along and make the effort to grab them and hold them down and paint on their colors or patterns or such.


[2847]
DE’I PHYIR DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI SKYE BA NI NGO BO NYID LAS BYUNG BA KHO NA’O ZHES SMRA’O,,

As such, says this school, the arising of entities is only something that happens simply because of their very nature.


	[2848]
[VI.99]
Hetuṃ vinaiva yadi janma bhavet tadānīṃ
syāt sarvato’pi sakalasya sadaiva janma,
Bījādikasya śataśaḥ phala saṃbhavāya
lokaś ca saṃgraham ayaṃ khalu naiva kuryāt.

,GAL TE RGYU MED KHO NAR SKYE BAR
LTA ZHIG ‘GYUR NA NI,
,DE TSO {%TSE} MTHA’ DAG RTAG TU THAMS CAD
LAS KYANG SKYE ‘GYUR ZHING,
,’BRAS ‘BYUNG CHED DU ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI YI
SA BON LA SOGS NI,
,BRGYA PHRAG DAG GI SGO NAS SDUD PAR
BYED PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR,

		Suppose then
		That it were the case
		That arising were
		Something that happened
		
		Only without
		A cause at all.

		In that case,
		Then all there is
		Would also have to
Simply pop up.

People of the
Everyday world,
Hoping that results
Will make their appearance,

Expend hundreds
Of efforts to accumulate
The seeds and so forth;

All this would
Never go on.


[2849]
‘DI LA BSHAD PAR BYA STE, GAL TE DNGOS PO RNAMS RGYU MED PA KHO NAR SKYE BAR LTA ZHIG ‘GYUR NA NI, DE’I TSE DNGOS PO MTHA’ DAG STE THAMS CAD LAS TE DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG GI RGYU MIN PA LAS KYANG SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE THAMS CAD KYANG RGYU MIN PAR ‘DRA BA’I PHYIR RO,,

To these we make the following reply.  Suppose then that it were the case that the arising of things were something that happened only without a cause at all.  In that case, then all the things there are would also have to simply pop up—without any cause of their own—from the entirety: from all the other things there are.  After all, they are all just the same, in not being causes.


[2850]
YANG GANG ZHIG AA MRA LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI SMIN PA DUS TSIGS LA LTOS SHING RE ‘GA’ MNGON PA DE YANG DE DAG LA RTAG TU YOD PA KHO NAR ‘GYUR TE, DUS TSIGS LA MI LTOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We can also point to the way that things like mango fruits ripen according to the season; when we see some of the mangos ripening, then it should be the case that they all ripened all the time, since they would not have to depend upon the arrival of the season.


[2851]
DE BZHIN DU BYA ROG LA YANG RMA [f. 203a] BYA’I MDONGS YOD PA DANG, RMA BYA LA YANG MNGAL GYI GNAS SKABS NA’ANG NE TZO’I SGRO YOD PAR ‘GYUR TE,

And in the same way, it would happen that all the crows had multicolored patterns on their bodies, just like the peacock; and these peacocks too—even in the womb—would possess the same colorful feathers as a parrot.


[2852]
DE DAG RGYU LA MI LTOS PA’I PHYIR TE DE LTAR RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL BA BRJOD NAS MTHONG BA DANG ‘GAL BA BRJOD PA STON TOG LA SOGS PA’I ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA’I CHED DU ‘JIG RTEN PA ‘DI BA YIS SA BON LA SOGS PA NI DKA’ BA BRGYA PHRAG DAG GI SGO NAS SDUD PA STE GSOG PAR BYED PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR BA ZHIG NA BYED PA YANG YIN PA’I PHYIR SKYE BA NGO BO NYID LAS BYUNG BA MA YIN NO,,

And that’s because none of these things would depend on any causes.  And so here are you fellows, saying something that contradicts all logic, and that contradicts our direct perception, and yet still you people of the everyday world—hoping that crops and the like, results, will make their appearance—expend hundreds of exhausting efforts all day long to accumulate, to gather, the seeds and so forth that will help this happen.  If what you say is true, then all this would never go on; and yet it does.  And so we can say that the arising of things is in no way something that just happens through the nature of things.


	[2853]
[VI.100]
Gṛhyeta naiva ca jagad yadi hetu śūnyaṃ
syād yadvad eva gaganotpala varṇa gandhau,
Gṛhnāsi lokam aticitrataraṃ ca tasmāl
lokaṃ svabuddhim iva kāraṇataḥ paraihi.

,GAL TE ‘GRO BA RGYU YIS STONG PAR
GYUR NA NAM MKHA’ YI,
,AUTPALA YI DRI MDOG JI BZHIN
 	GZUNG DU MED NYID NA,
,SHIN TU CHES BKRA’I ‘JIG RTEN ‘DZIN PA’ANG
[*YIN PA] DE YI PHYIR,
,RANG GI BLO BZHIN ‘JIG RTEN RGYU LAS
YIN PAR SHES PAR GYIS,

		Suppose that the variety
		Of living beings
		Was simply devoid
		Of any cause.

		In this case,
		They would all become
		Something totally ineffable,

		Like the scent and color
		Of a blue lotus
		That suddenly popped
		Out in thin air.

		And then it would be
		The same with this
		Entire world that
		We hold before us,
		With all its endless variety.

		As such, you must
Understand that the world
Before us is the same
As our mind,

And something
From its own causes.	


[2854]
SKYON GZHAN YANG GAL TE ‘GRO BA RGYU YIS STONG PA STE RGYU MED PAR ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR NA ‘GRO BA ‘DI DAG NAM MKHA’ YI AUTPALA YI DRI DANG MDOG JI BZHIN DU GZUNG DU MED PA NYID DU ‘GYUR BA YIN NA

And there’s yet another problem here.  Suppose that the variety of living beings was simply devoid of any cause: that it had no cause.  In this case, they would all become something totally ineffable, like the scent and color of a blue lotus that suddenly popped out in thin air.


[2855]
SHIN TU CHES BKRA BA’I ‘JIG RTEN ‘DZIN PA’ANG YIN PA DE’I PHYIR RANG GI BLO SNGON PO’I RNAM PA CAN NI SNGON PO LAS SKYE BA DE BZHIN DU ‘JIG RTEN MTHA’ DAG RANG GI RGYU KHO NA LAS SKYE BA YIN PAR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

And then it would be the same with this entire world that we hold before us, with all its endless variety.  As such, when our mind takes on an aspect of blueness, it must have come from some blue; you must understand that the entire world before us is the same, and only something that grows from its own causes.


[2856]
,RGYANG PHAN LTAR NA DE NYID NI BZHI STE ‘GRO BA SNA TSOGS PA MTHA’ DAG GI RGYUR GYUR PA SA DANG CHU DANG ME DANG RLUNG ZHES BYA BA RNAMS SO,,

According to this same Outcast School, there are four essential natures to things: these are, they would say, the earth; water; fire; and wind that serve as the cause for all the variety of beings that we see.


[2857]
DE RNAMS KYI YONGS SU SMIN PA’I KHYAD PAR LAS PAD+MA DANG BAL PO SE’U LA SOGS PA DAG DANG, RMA BYA DANG BYA GAG LA SOGS PA DAG GI SNA TSOGS PA JI LTAR MTHONG BZHIN PA ‘THAD PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, BLO DNGOS PO’I DE KHO NA NYID SNA TSOGS YONGS SU GCOD PA POR GYUR PA YANG DE KHO NA LAS SKYE BA YIN NO,,

And then from details of how these things make their final ripening, we get the lotus or the pomegranate, or whatever it may be.  And then we see peacock, or the duck, and so on; this great variety of things.  It is all quite proper; and not only that, the mind itself—the instrument which makes all these distinctions between the natures of various things—arises from the very same things, and nothing else.


[2858]
JI LTAR CHANG DAG LA ‘BYUNG BA’I BYE BRAG PHRAD PA YONGS SU ‘GYUR BA’I KHYAD PAR LAS SROG CHAGS RNAMS KYI MYOS PA DANG BRGYAL BA’I RGYU MYOS PAR [f. 203b] ‘GYUR BA’I NUS PA SKYE BA

There are all kinds of liquor; and from distinctions in how the different chemical elements within them transform, they become causes that can inebriate different types of beings, and even cause them to fall unconscious.  That is, there grows here a capacity to make people drunk.


[2859]
DE BZHIN DU NUR NUR PO LA SOGS PA’I ‘BYUNG BA CHEN PO’I KHYAD PAR CAN YONGS SU SMIN PA LAS BLO DAG SKYE ZHING, DE DAG DNGOS PO MTHA’ DAG YONGS SU GCOD PAR BYED PA’I BAR DU YANG ‘GYUR RO,,

That is—even at the early stages within the womb, when for example the fetus is nothing more than a length of barely congealed liquid—there is a special feature of the great elements where they can come to mature, completely, into all our states of mind.  And then this goes all the way up to the point where we have the capacity to make fine distinctions between all the entities there are in the universe itself.

 
[2860]
DE’I PHYIR PHYI ROL DANG NANG GI DNGOS PO RNAMS NI ‘JIG RTEN ‘DI’I RGYU LAS BYUNG BA KHO NA YIN GYI, GANG DU BYAS PA’I LAS KYI RNAM PAR SMIN PA ‘DIR RAM, ‘DIR BYAS PA’I RNAM PAR SMIN PA ‘JIG RTEN GZHAN DU ‘BYUNG BA ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL DAG YOD PA NYID NI MA YIN NO SNYAM DU SEMS SO,,

As such, we can say that all the outer and inner entities that exist have occurred only through causes here in this world.  It is not then the case—in my thinking—that the ripening of karma we have committed occurs here; or that the ripening of what we have done here occurs in some other world.  Those other worlds, after all, are not even something that exists yet.


	[2861]
,MDZES MA LEGS PAR SPYOD CING BZA’ BAR GYIS,
,LUS MCHOG ‘DAS GANG DE KHYOD LA MI ‘BYUNG,
,LUS ‘DI TSOGS PAR GYUR PA TZAM ZHIG STE,
,’JIGS MA SONG BA LDOG PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,
ZHES SMRA BA STE, ‘DI NI BU MO LA MNGON PAR BGROD PAR ‘DOD CING BU MO’I ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL MED PAR RTOGS PAR ‘DOD NAS SMRAS PA YIN NO,,

As the lines go,

My beautiful lady,
Enjoy your life,
And consume while you can.

Once this perfect body
Of yours is gone,
It will never return.

This body is just
A temporary
Coming together;

That will never
Be destroyed,
It will never
Come to a stop.

This is all stated to a maiden by someone who hopes to have sex with her, and who is hoping that she will come to an understanding that there will be no young lady in the life beyond.


[2862]
NAG TSOS, ‘DAS PA’I ‘JIGS PA ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR MA YIN, ZHES BSGYUR RO,,

The master translator Naktso has rendered the one part here,

The destruction
That is gone
Is not something
That will come.


[2863]
‘DI LA BRJOD PAR BYA STE, KHYOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL MED DO SNYAM PA’I NGES PA ‘DI RGYU MTSAN GANG LAS YIN, ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL DA LTA MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA MA YIN PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO SNYAM NA,

Let’s look at what this is saying.  What is the reason that you are so certain, thinking to yourself that “I will come to no other world in the future”?  And suppose you answer to this thinking to yourself, “It’s because that world beyond is certainly not something that I can see at present.”


[2864]
‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL MNGON SUM DU MA MTHONG BA DE MNGON SUM ZHIG GAM MNGON SUM MA YIN PA ZHIG YIN GRANG MNGON SUM MO ZHE NA,

And so now we’ll ask you: Is that inability to see the world beyond something that you see itself directly, or that you do not see directly?  Which one is it?  And then suppose that you answer, “That is something that I can see directly.”


[2865]
MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA LOG PA MNGON SUM DU ‘DOD NA DNGOS PO MED PA YANG MNGON SUM DANG MI ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If you thus agree that a failure to see something directly is something that you can see directly, then it’s no contradiction to say that you can perceive, directly, the absence of a particular entity.


[2866]
DE’I PHYIR DNGOS PO MED PA YANG KHYOD LA DNGOS POR ‘GYUR TE, TSE RABS PHA ROL MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA LOG PA MNGON SUM GYI DNGOS KYI GZHAL BYA MNGON SUM [f. 204a] PA YIN PA’I PHYIR DNGOS PO BZHIN NO,,

And in this case, the lack of an entity becomes itself—for you—an entity.  That is, if the inability to see, directly, the world beyond this life is something you see directly—an entity which you can consider directly—then that other thing is, similarly, an entity.


[2867]
DE LTA NA DNGOS PO MED PA ZHES PA ‘GA’ YANG MED PAS DNGOS PO YANG MED PAR ‘GYUR TE ZLA BO MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And so if the lack of an entity is nothing at all, then the entity itself could never exist, since it had no counterpart.


[2868]
DE GNYIS MED NA ‘BYUNG BA BZHI MED PA DANG ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL MED PA NYID DU DAM BCA’ BA YANG NYAMS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And if these two do not exist, then your very insistence that the four elements cannot exist, and neither the world beyond this one, itself collapses.


[2869]
CI STE MNGON SUM MA YIN NA NI RE ZHIG MNGON DU GYUR PA MA YIN PA’I PHYIR, MNGON SUM TSAD MAS MA BZUNG BAS JI LTAR MA BZUNG BA DE’I SGO NAS ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL MED PAR DPOG PAR ‘GYUR, CI STE RJES SU DPAG PAS BZUNG BA YIN NO ZHE NA,

And suppose then you come up with the following claim:

Well, if there is no direct perception of it, then for the moment we’d have to say that it could not be something directly evident; and we could say here then that it’s the same kind of not being held as when something is not held by a direct form of accurate perception—and via this method then we can induce that there is a world beyond.  It’s the same as if that world were an object held by a deductive form of accurate perception.


[2870]
SPYIR MNGON SUM DU MA ZAD RJES DPAG LAS RAB TU GRUB PAS KYANG SKYES BU’I DON SGRUB PA YIN NA RJES DPAG ‘DI NI KHYOD KYIS KHAS BLANGS PA YANG MA YIN TE,
,JI TZAM DBANG PO’I SPYOD YUL BA,
,SKYES BU DE TZAM KHO NAR ZAD,
,BZANG MO MANG THOS GANG SMRA BA,
,DE NI SPYANG KI’I RJES DANG ‘DRA,

Generally speaking, it is not only through direct forms of accurate perception that people can achieve their ends; they also use deductive forms of accurate perception.  Therefore, it’s not as if this kind of deduction is not something that you would accept.  As the lines go,

There are those who say
That it ends with the
Objects of the activity
Of the physical senses.

O pure lady,
Those like this
Who are called learned
Are as much a wolf
As its tracks.


[2871]
ZHES SKYES BUS DON RTOGS PA’I TSAD MA NI MIG SOGS KYI DBANG PO’I SPYOD YUL JI TZAM MTHONG BA’I MNGON SUM DE TZAM DU ZAD PAR SMRAS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

But it is the case that as far as the types of accurate perception that a person can use to perceive objects, you seem to be saying that the only possibility is the direct perception where of the objects of the powers of sense.


	[2872]
[VI.101]
Bhūtāni tāni na hi nāma tathātmakāni
yenātmanā tava dhiyo viṣayībhavanti,
Atraiva yasya bahulo’sti mano’ndhakāro
lokaṃ paraṃ sa katham eṣyati samyag eva.

,’BYUNG BA DE DAG BDAG NYID GANG ZHIG
GIS NI KHYOD KYI BLO’I,
,YUL DU ‘GYUR BA DE YI BDAG NYID
CAN NI MA YIN NA,
,GANG LA YID KYI MUN PA ‘THUG PO
‘DI NYID DU YOD PA,
,DES NI JI LTAR ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL
YANG DAG RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR,

		It is only constructs
		Of these elements
		Which can serve as
		The object of your mind.

		And if things
		Were not such constructs,

		Then how on earth
		Could that which is
The thick darkness
		Of your mind itself

		Ever come to grasp,
		In a correct way,
		A world beyond
		This one?


[2873]
SA LA SOGS PA’I ‘BYUNG BA BZHI PO DE DAG KHYOD KYI GZHUNG LAS BSHAD PA’I BDAG NYID GANG ZHIG GIS NI KHYOD KYI BLO’I YUL DU GYUR PA DE LTAR DE YI BDAG NYID CAN DU NI YOD PA MA YIN NA SHIN TU RAGS PA’I DON GANG LA YID KYI MUN PA ‘THUG PO ‘DI NYID DU YOD PA DES NI, JI LTAR NA SHIN TU PHRA BA’I ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL YOD PA DANG MED PA GANG YANG YANG DAG PAR RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR TE RTOGS PA MED DO,,

According to your scriptures, it is only constructs of these four elements of earth and the rest which can serve as the object of your mind.  And if it happened to be the case that there were things that did not exist as such constructs, then let’s think about what is that thick darkness of your mind itself, holding on to its forms that are so gross in their nature.  How on earth then could it ever come to grasp, in a correct way, the existence or lack of existence of an extremely subtle world beyond this one?  The fact is that it could not.


	[2874]
[VI.102]
Jñeya svabhāva viparīta dṛśaṃ paraihi
svātmānam eva paraloka niṣedha kāle,
Tad dṛṣṭi jāta sadṛśāśraya dehavattvād
bhūtātma sattvam upayāsi yadā tadeva.

,’JIG RTEN PHA ROL ‘GOG PAR BYED PA’I
DUS SU BDAG NYID NI,
,SHES BYA’I RANG BZHIN PHYIN CI LOG TU
LTA BAR RTOGS BYA STE,
,DE YI LTA BA’I RNAM PA’I RTEN MTSUNGS
LUS DANG LDAN NYID PHYIR,
,GANG TSE ‘BYUNG BA’I BDAG NYID YOD NYID
KHAS LEN DE TSE BZHIN,

		When you good fellows
		Undertake to deny
		The existence of a world
		Beyond this one,

		You are looking
		At the nature
		Of existing things

		In a way which is
		Completely mistaken.

		This is equivalent
		To a basis for that view:

		A body which is
		A basis for that
		To be possessed.

		It is similar to
That point at which
You take a position

Where you accept
The very existence
Of embodiments
Of the elements.


[2875]
SKYON GZHAN YANG ‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL ‘GOG PAR BYED PA’I DUS SU BDAG NYID DE RGYANG PHAN NI SHES BYA’I RANG BZHIN PHYIN CI LOG TU LTA BAR RTOGS PAR BYA STE,

And there are still further problems with your position.  When you good fellows—you Outcasts—undertake to deny the existence of a world beyond this one, what you are doing is looking at the nature of existing things in a way which is completely mistaken.


[2876]
‘JIG RTEN PHA ROL LA [f. 204b] SKUR PA ‘DEBS PA DE YI LTA BA’I RNAM PA’I RTEN TE, DE GNAS PA’I RGYUR MTSUNGS PA STE ‘DRA BA’I LUS KYI KHOG PA DANG LDAN PA NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR, DPER NA GANG GI TSE ‘BYUNG BA’I BDAG NYID BDEN PAR YOD PA NYID KHAS LEN PA DE’I TSE BZHIN NO,,

And this way of looking acts as the basis for that view that you have where you discredit the existence of the world beyond.  The viewpoint is then equivalent to a cause which allows that other view to survive; it is like the vessel of a body which gives that view a basis for being possessed.  It is similar for example to that point at which you take a position where you accept the very existence of embodiments of the elements which could have some kind of reality.


[2877]
CI STE ‘BYUNG BA BDEN PAR RTOGS PA’I TSE YANG PHYIN CI MA LOG PAS MTHONG BA’I DPE BSGRUB BYA’I CHOS KYIS STONG PA YIN NO SNYAM NA,

In response to this, you might think to yourself the following—

When we perceive the elements as existing in truth, that is an unmistaken perception.  The example then you use of something we can supposedly see is itself totally devoid of the quality you are trying to establish.


[2878]
DE YANG YOD PA MA YIN TE RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA DANG YOD PA MIN PA’I ‘BYUNG BA LA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA DANG SKYE BA NYID DU RTOGS PAS PHYIN CI LOG TU LTA BA NYID GRUB PA’I PHYIR RO,,

But this is not the case either.  Suppose you perceive that elements which do not actually exist through any nature of their own, and which in fact do not have any existence, could exist through just such a nature, or could arise in just the way you think.  This kind of view of things is established as being one which is completely mistaken.


[2879]
‘DIS NI RANG GI RTAGS YANG DAG GI SBYOR BA RNAMS LA DPER BZUNG BA LA BSGRUB BYA’I CHOS KYIS MI STONG BA DGOS PAR BSTAN TE, RTAGS SU BZUNG BA LA YANG ‘DRA LA, SNGAR SGRA MI RTAG PAR SGRUB PA LA MIG GIS GZUNG BYA BKOD PA MA GRUB PA’I RTAGS SU YANG BSHAD PAS DAM BCA’ RTAGS KYIS SGRUB PA LA TSUL GSUM DGOS PAR BSTAN NO,,

What all this is showing is that when we present a representative example to accompany an accurate logical statement, it must in fact not be empty of the quality that we are trying to prove.  That is, what we take as the reason in the proof remains as it was; if we have been trying to prove that sound is something changing, and then give “because it is something perceived by the sense power of the eye” as the reason, then we would say that this is an invalid reason.  And so the point is that—in order to establish an assertion by using a certain reason—all three relationships of a valid proof must be present.


	[2880]
[VI.103]
Bhūtāni tāni na hi santi yathā tathoktaṃ
sāmānyataḥ svaparato dvayataś ca janma,
Āhetukaṃ ca khalu yena purā niṣiddhaṃ
bhūtānyamūnyanuditāni na santi tasmāt.

,’BYUNG BA DE DAG JI LTAR YOD MIN
DE LTAR BSHAD ZIN TE,
,GANG GI PHYIR NA GONG DU RANG GZHAN
LAS DANG GNYIS KA LAS,
,SKYE DANG RGYU MED THUN MONG DU NI
BKAG ZIN DE YI PHYIR,
,MA BSHAD ‘BYUNG BA ‘DI DAG LTA ZHIG
YOD PA MA YIN NO,

We have long since
Explained how it is
That these elements
Cannot be something
Which exists.

And how was it?
We undertook to deny,
Previously, that things
Could grow from themselves;

From some other;
From both; or without
Any cause at all.

We have already denied
The idea in common.
Much less with these elements,

This is not something
Where we have given
No explanation.


[2881]
‘BYUNG BA RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA DE NYID BSGRUB PAR BYA DGOS SO ZHE NA,

And suppose you say,

Well the thing that you should be proving is that one thing: that the elements never arise through any nature of their own.


[2882]
‘BYUNG BA DE DAG JI LTAR RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN PA DE LTAR SNGAR BSHAD ZIN TO {%TE?},

But the fact is that we have long since explained, already, how it is that these elements cannot be something which exists through any nature of its own.


[2883]
GANG GI PHYIR NA GONG DU RANG DANG, GZHAN LAS DANG, GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA DANG, RGYU MED DU SKYE BA ‘GOG PAR BYED PA NA ‘BYUNG BA RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA YANG BDAG GIS THUN MONG DU NI STE SPYIR BKAG ZIN PA DE YI PHYIR, ‘BYUNG BA ‘DI DAG LTA ZHIG STE GANG YANG SNGAR SPYI’I TSUL GYIS BKAG PAS MA BSHAD PA YOD PA MA YIN PAS DPE GRUB BO,,

And how was it that we explained that?  We undertook to deny, previously, that things could grow from themselves; from something other than themselves; from both themselves and from something other than themselves; or without any cause at all.  As such, we have already denied the common or general idea that the elements could grow through any nature of their own.  Therefore much less with these elements, but with anything at all, in very general terms, we have made our denial; this is not something where we have given no explanation of the case; and thus the example is proof.


[2884]
DE BZHIN DU THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA LA SKUR PA ‘DEBS PA DANG, DE LAS GZHAN PA’I RANG [f. 205a] BZHIN GYI DNGOS POR SMRA BA RNAMS KYI GRUB PA’I MTHA’ ‘GOG PA NA YANG, RTOGS PA PHYIN CI LOG PA SBYAR BAR BYA STE,

We need to disprove the positions of those who discount any state of omniscience, and any other such ideas of those who profess some entities which could exist through some nature of their own, by making reference to the same sorts of basic wrong ideas.


[2885]
DPER NA
,RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS ‘GOG PAR BYED PA’I
DUS SU BDAG NYID NI,
,SHES BYA’I RANG BZHIN PHYIN CI LOG TU
LTA BAR RTOGS BYA STE,
,DE YI LTA BA’I RNAM PA’I RTEN MTSUNGS
LUS DANG LDAN NYID PHYIR,
,GANG TSE ‘BYUNG BA’I BDAG NYID YOD NYID
KHAS LEN DE TSE BZHIN,
ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA SBYAR BAR BYA STE, YOD PA DANG MED PA NYID DU LTA BA THAMS CAD DGAG PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We can for example cite here the following lines, and those like them—

When you attempt to deny
The existence of
A completely enlightened being,

The fact is that you are seeing
The nature of existing things
In a completely mistaken way.

In this case you have a perfect
Foundation similar to a body for
The views that you are holding;

For that is the case when you accept
The idea that there could exist
A perfect self-nature to the elements.

That is, what we assert is that all views that things could exist perfectly, or not exist perfectly, are to be denied.


[2886]
CI STE KHYOD LA YANG THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA ‘DI MTSUNGS SO SNYAM NA DE YANG YOD PA MA YIN TE, KHO BO CAG PHYIN CI LOG PAR SGRUB PA LA DPE MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And suppose you think to yourself that the necessary implications raised here are just the same for our own beliefs.  But that is in fact not the case, for we have presented no example that is meant to prove something that is entirely mistaken.


	[2887]
,’JIG RTEN GZHAN GTOGS YOD PA NYID DU
RTOGS PA’I DUS SU BDAG
,SHES BYA’I RANG BZHIN DAM PA’I DON NI 
LTA BAR RTOGS BYA STE,
,BDAG GI LTA BA’I RNAM PA’I RTEN MTSUNGS
LUS DANG LDAN NYID PHYIR,
,GANG GI TSE NA BDAG MED RTOGS PAR
KHAS LEN DE TSE BZHIN,
ZHES BRJOD PAR NUS PA YANG YIN NO,,

We are also able to make the following pronouncement:

When I am able
To realize that what
Is contained in the other world
Is certainly something which exists,

Then I realize
That ultimate object:
The nature of every existing thing.

I possess indeed that body
Which is a likeness of
The type of view I have reached;

For this reflects the point
In time when I accepted
That I had realized
That there is no self-nature. 


[2888]
DE BZHIN DU,
,’DI NA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA YOD CES
RTOGS PA’I DUS SU BDAG
,SHES BYA’I RANG BZHIN DAM PA’I DON NI
LTA BAR RTOGS BYA STE,
,GTAN TSIGS DANG DPE DAG NI DE GNYIS KHO NA’O,,

And the autocommentary continues with:

In the same way, we have here nothing less than the pair of a proof and representative example—

	At that point in time when
	I come to the realization
	That there truly does exist
	The state of knowing all things,

	Then I have realized
	The nature of all things;
	I have seen that ultimate object.
	

[2889]
DE BZHIN DU DNGOS PO THAMS CAD ZHES PA LA YANG SBYAR BAR BYA’O,,

We can also apply this to the expression “every object there is.”


[2890]
DE’I PHYIR TSUL ‘DIS NI,
,DE NYID DE LAS ‘BYUNG MIN GZHAN DAG
LAS LTA GA LA ZHIG
,GNYIS KA LAS KYANG MA YIN RGYU MED
PAR NI GA LA YOD,
CES GANG DAM BCAS BAR {%PAR} GYUR PA BZHI PO RAB TU BSGRUBS PA YIN NO, ZHES [f. 205b] GSUNGS PAS GZHAN LUGS BKAG PA YIN GYI RANG LUGS MA BSGRUBS SO ZHES SMRA BAR MI BYA’O,,

The autocommentary concludes here with—

And so we see it stated that (the four points) which we assert are perfectly established:

	That never came
	From that thing itself;

	And so how
	Could it ever have come
	From other things?

	Neither did it come
	From both;

	And how could it
	Ever have come
	Without a cause at all?

Thus we would have to ask you not to make the claim here that the position of the other side has been denied, but that our own position has not been substantiated.



Where the four take us

[2891]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third general topic from before: the point we arrive at, by denying that things could start in any of these four different ways.


[2892]
‘DIR SMRAS PA, DNGOS PO RNAMS BDAG DANG GZHAN DANG GNYIS KA DANG RGYU MED LAS MI SKYE NA, ‘O NA JI LTAR SKYE ZHE NA

And so here’s the question.  Suppose someone comes along and asks the following question—

If it’s the case that things arise neither from themselves, from something other than themselves, from both, or without any cause at all, then how is it that they do arise?


[2893]
BSHAD PA, GAL TE DNGOS PO RNAMS LA RANG BZHIN ‘GA’ ZHIG YOD NA NI, SKYE BA’I RNAM PAR RTOG PA GZHAN MI SRID PA’I PHYIR, THE TSOM MED PAR DE BDAG GAM GZHAN NAM GNYIS KA’AM RGYU MED PA ZHIG LAS SKYE BA’AM DMIGS PAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG GO

And then here is the answer.  If entities had any kind of nature at all to them, then any other idea about how they could ever arise would be impossible—which means that beyond any shadow of a doubt they would have to arise or come to exist through themselves, or something other, or from both, or without any cause at all.


[2894]
,GANG DAG DBANG PHYUG LA SOGS PA DAG LAS DNGOS PO RNAMS SKYE BAR MNGON PAR ‘DOD PA DE DAG GI LTAR NA YANG, DBANG PHYUG LA SOGS PA DE DAG BDAG TU GYUR PA’AM, GZHAN DU GYUR PA’AM, GNYIS KAR GYUR PA ZHIG TU ‘GYUR BAS DBANG PHYUG LA SOGS PA RGYUR SMRA BA DAG KYANG BSHAD ZIN PA’I SKYON LAS MI ‘DA’ STE, DE’I PHYIR SKYED PAR BYED PA’I RGYU’I RNAM PAR RTOG PA GZHAN LNGA PA YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

And it doesn’t really matter how those who believe that things have arisen through some all-powerful being or the like say it happened; because their beliefs would be subject to the same old problems that we have spent all this time describing.  That is, the all-powerful being or whatever else it was would themselves have to represent the result itself, or something other than it, or both.  As such, there would be no fifth possibility one could imagine for the cause that inspired all these things to arise.


[2895]
DE’I PHYIR GZHAN MED PA’I PHYIR LA, RNAM PAR RTOG PA BZHIS SKYE BAR BTAGS PA BKAG PA’I PHYIR DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN SKYE BA MED DO ZHES BSTAN PA’I PHYIR,

As such, there really are no other options; and so to deny some kind of arising that a person might imagine happening through those four options mentioned, the following lines of the root text are meant to demonstrate that there is no arising to things that could occur through some nature of its own.


	[2896]
[VI.104]
Bhāvāḥ svabhāva rahitāḥ svaparobhayasmāj
janmāsti hetum anapekṣya ca naiva yasmād,
Mohas tu yena bahalo ghana vṛnda tulyo
lokasya tena viṣayāḥ khalu bhānti mithyā.

[VI.104a]
,GANG GI PHYIR NA BDAG DANG GZHAN DANG
GNYIS KA LAS SKYE DANG,
,RGYU LA MA LTOS YOD PA MIN PAS
DNGOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN BRAL,

		For the reason
		That there can exist
		No arising of a thing
		Which could occur
		From itself,

		Or from something other,
		Or from both,
		Or without relying
		Upon any cause at all,

		Entities are devoid
		Of some nature
		Of their own.


[2897]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA BDAG DANG GZHAN DANG GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA DANG, RGYU LAM {%LA MA} LTOS PAR SKYE BA YOD PA MIN PAS DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DANG BRAL LO, ZHES SMOS SO,,

For the reason that there can exist no arising of a thing which could occur from itself, or from something other than itself, or from both, or without relying upon any cause at all, we can say that entities are devoid of existing through some nature of their own.


[2898]
‘DIS NI MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA THAL ‘GYUR GYIS BKAG KYANG, MTHAR RTAGS GANG LA BRTEN NAS RJES DPAG SKYE TSUL STON TE, DE YANG MTHA’ BZHI LAS SKYE BA MED PA NI GTAN TSIGS SO,,

What we have just done here is to deny that things could arise through any of four different extreme possibilities; but in the end we will need to show a logical reasoning which is something that we can rely upon to inspire a deductive form of accurate perception for this point.  And that then is the reasoning which demonstrates that things cannot arise through any one of four extreme possibilities.


[2899]
DNGOS PO RNAMS ZHES PA NI CHOS CAN NO, ,RANG BZHIN GYIS [f. 206a] GRUB PA DANG BRAL BA NI DAM BCA’O,,

The subject under consideration here is provided by the phrase, “all entities.”  And the assertion is provided by saying “they are devoid of existing through any nature of their own.”



Refuting debate
about the denial

[2900]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, DE’I DON BSDUS TE BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our second point from before: refuting debate about this denial.  We proceed in two sections: the actual point, and a summary presentation.  Here is the first.


[2901]
GAL TE DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA ZHIG YIN NA, ‘O NA MA SKYES PA SNGON PO LA SOGS PA RNAMS JI LTAR GZUNG ZHE NA,

One may begin with the following question:

Suppose it is the case that there is no such thing as objects arising through any nature of their own.  If then things like blue have never arisen, how is it that we can perceive them?


[2902]
SNGON PO LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN JI LTAR YANG MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA ‘GA’ ZHIG GI SNANG BA’I YUL NYID DU ‘GYUR BA MIN PAS, DE LTAR GYI MIG LA SOGS PA’I SHES PAS, SNGO SOGS KYI RANG BZHIN NI BZUNG BA MA YIN NO,,

It is not the case that blue and the rest—regardless of what their nature may be—could ever act as that particular object which makes its appearance to some number of states of mind infected by ignorance.  As such, the nature of blue and the like is not something which can be perceived by the awareness of an eye or the like such as these.


[2903]
‘O NA GANG ZHIG YANG DANG YANG DU YUL GYI NGO BO NYID DU MDUN DU SNANG BAR MTHONG BA DE, CI ZHIG TU ‘GYUR BAR ‘OS SHE NA,

Which would lead one then to the following question:

Well then, but it does happen that there is something which makes its appearance before us, over and over, as the very essence of an object of perception; and we observe it.  How then would that ever be something that could happen?


[2904]
‘DI NI PHYIN CI LOG GI DBANG GIS SNANG BAS NA RANG BZHIN MA YIN TE, MA RIG PAS BSLAD PA’I DBANG KHO NAS BDAG NYID DER DMIGS PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

This is something that appears only through the power of some mistaken perception; it is not though the nature of a thing.  It is only something that we perceive as some kind of entity by force of our mind’s being infected by misunderstanding.  In order to convey this point, the root text says the following—


	[2905]
[VI.104b]
,GANG GIS SPRIN TSOGS DANG MTSUNGS GTI MUG
STUG PO ‘JIG RTEN LA,
,YOD PA DES NA YUL RNAMS LOG PA
DAG TU SNANG BAR ‘GYUR,

		The fact is that
		The everyday world
		Exists in a dense
		Lack of understanding

		Which is just the same
		As a huge gathering
		Of rain clouds.

		And for that reason, they have
		A mistaken impression
		Of the objects around them;

		This is how things make
		Their appearance to them.


[2906]
GANG GIS TE GANG GI PHYIR CHAR SPRIN NAG PO’I TSOGS DANG MTSUNGS PA’I GTI MUG STUG PO STE ‘THUG PO SNGON PO LA SOGS PA’I RANG BZHIN MTHONG BA G-YOGS NAS GNAS PA ‘JIG RTEN SEMS CAN LA YOD PA

The fact is—the point is—that beings of the everyday world exist in a state where they are smothered by seeing a nature in things like blue and the rest: they are surrounded by a dense, a very thick, lack of understanding which is just the same as a huge gathering of dark rain clouds.


[2907]
DES NA, BYIS PA RNAMS LA SNGON PO LA SOGS PA’I RANG BZHIN MTHONG BA YOD PA MIN TE, YUL RNAMS LA RANG GI NGO BO PHYIN CI LOG PA DAG TU MNGON PAR ZHEN PA’I GNAS SU GYUR PA ‘DI NI, BYIS PA ‘DI BDEN PAR ZHEN PA RNAMS LA SNANG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And for that reason, infants do not experience any sight towards the nature of things like blue and the rest; they live in a state where they have a craving for—they have a completely mistaken impression of—the real nature of the objects around them.  This then is how things make their appearance to these infants, who crave some true existence to things.


[2908]
GAL TE GTI MUG GIS BKAB PA’I PHYIR DE KHO NA NYID MI MTHONG DU CHUG KYANG, PHYIN CI LOG TU MTHONG BA CI LAM {%LA MA} YIN ZHE NA,

One may next ask the following question:

Suppose ones eyes are blocked by dark ignorance; even if, then, we were induced to try to see suchness, wouldn’t we necessarily see it in a mistaken way?


[2909]
RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA MIN BZHIN DU DER SNANG BA NI, GTI MUG GI [f. 206b] DBANG GIS YIN NO ZHES PHYI’I DPE’I SGO NAS BSTAN PA’I PHYIR,

The answer is that what comes next in the root text is meant to present a follow-up metaphor to indicate how the fact that things appear to exist through some essential nature of their own—even though they have no such nature—is due to dark ignorance.


	[2910]
[VI.105]
Kaścid yathaiva vitathaṃ timira prabhāvāt
keśa dvicandra śikhicandraka makṣikādi,
Gṛhṇāti tadvad abudhaḥ khalu moha doṣād
buddhyā vicitram avagacchati saṃskṛtaṃ hi.

,JI LTAR RAB RIB MTHU YIS ‘GA’ ZHIG
SKRA SHAD ZLA GNYIS DANG,
,RMA BYA’I MDONGS DANG SBRANG MA LA SOGS
LOG PAR ‘DZIN BYED PA,
,DE BZHIN DU NI GTI [209b] MUG SKYON GYI
DBANG GIS MI MKHAS PAS,
,’DUS BYAS LTA ZHIG SNA TSOGS BLO GROS
KYIS NI RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR,

It’s possible
For some people,
By force of a cataract,

To be made to hold,
Mistakenly,

A strand of hair,
One moon as two,
The pattern
Of a peacock’s feathers,

A random fly, or
Something of the like [f. 209b].

The same sort of thing
Happens with those
Who are not wise,

Due to the problem
Of their dark ignorance.

They perceive
Various objects
Like produced things
With their intellect.


[2911]
JI LTAR DBANG PO RAB RIB KYIS BSLAD PA’I MTHU YIS RAB RIB CAN ‘GA’ ZHIG GIS SKRA SHAD DANG ZLA BA GNYIS DANG RMA BYA’I MDONGS DANG SBRANG MA LA SOGS PA LOG PAR TE MED KYANG YOD PA LTAR ‘DZIN PA STE MTHONG BAR BYED PA

It’s possible for ones sense powers to be skewed by force of the effects of a cataract; so that some people with cataracts may mistakenly see a strand of hair that’s not actually there; or one moon that appears as two; or a spot of color like the pattern on a peacock’s feathers; a random fly; or something of the like.  When we say “mistakenly” here, what we mean is that—even though none of these things is actually there—our condition makes us hold to or see them as existing.


[2912]
DE BZHIN DU, GTI MUG GI SKYON GYI DBANG GIS MI MKHAS PA SO SKYES SNGON PO SOGS KYI ‘DUS BYAS LTA ZHIG SNA TSOGS PA BLO GROS KYIS TE DE DAG GI SHES PAS RTOGS PAR TE MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

The same sort of thing happens with those who are not wise—that is, with common beings—due to the problem of their dark ignorance.  That is, they perceive—they see—various objects like produced things (blue and such) with their intellect; with their particular mental state.


[2913]
‘DI NI RTEN ‘BREL GYI MDO LAS, MA RIG PA’I RKYEN GYIS ‘DU BYED RNAMS ZHES BYA BA DANG,

This point is expressed in the Sutra on Interdependence, where it mentions “examples of fresh karma, due to the factor of misunderstanding.”


[2914]
DE BZHIN DU MA RIG PA DANG RJES SU ‘BREL BA’I GANG ZAG ‘DI NI, BSOD NAMS MNGON PAR ‘DU BYA BA DANG, BSOD NAMS MA YIN PA MNGON PAR ‘DU BYA BA DANG, MI G-YO BA MNGON PAR ‘DU BYA BA YANG MNGON PAR ‘DU BYED DO, ZHES BYA BA DANG,

We also read:

And in the same way, we see statements that an individual who is linked with misunderstanding will bring together an expression of merit; and they will bring together an expression of non-merit; and they will bring together an expression of unshifting karma.


[2915]
DE BZHIN DU MA RIG PA ‘GAGS PAS ‘DU BYED ‘GAG CES BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS GSUNGS PA YIN NO,,

In the same way, the Conqueror has stated that “When we put a stop to misunderstanding, we put a stop to fresh karma.”


	[2916]
[VI.106]
Mohaṃ pratītya yadi karma vinā na mohād
bhūtaṃ tad ityabudha eva pareti nūnam,
Sad buddhi bhāskara vihīna ghanāndhakāro
vidvāṃs tu śūnyam avagacchati mucyate ca.

,GAL TE GTI MUG BRTEN NAS LAS ‘BYUNG
GTI MUG MED PAR DE,
,MI ‘BYUNG ZHES BYAR MI MKHAS KHO NAS
RTOGS PAR GOR MA CHAG,
,BLO BZANG NYI MAS MUN PA STUG PO
RNAM PAR BSAL BA YI,
,MKHAS PA DAG NI STONG NYID KHONG DU
CHUD CING GROL BAR ‘GYUR,

		This description
		Is without doubt
		A reference to the fact

		That it is only those
		Who are not wise
		Who understand all this

		As saying that karma
		Occurs dependent upon
		Dark ignorance;

		And without
		This dark ignorance, then
		That would not occur.

		The wise grasp
		That these are
		Perfectly empty,

		Using the bright sun
		Of their fine minds
		To dispel—completely—
		That thick fog;
		And they are liberated.


[2917]
DE’I PHYIR TSUL ‘DIS GAL TE GTI MUG MA RIG PA LA BRTEN NAS ‘DU BYED KYI LAS ‘BYUNG LA, GTI MUG MED PAR LAS DE MI ‘BYUNG ZHES BYA BAR GSUNGS PA NI, MI MKHAS PA KHO NAS RTOGS PAR TE DE’I DBANG DU BYAS BAR GOR MA CHAG GO

As such, this description is without a doubt a reference to the fact that it is only those who are not wise who understand all this as saying that karma of the fresh type occurs dependent upon dark ignorance, or misunderstanding; and that without this dark ignorance, then that karma would not occur.


[2918]
,MKHAS PA DAG NI MA RIG PA’I RKYEN GYIS ‘DU BYED DO ZHES GSUNGS PA MTHONG BA NA, ‘DU BYED RNAMS RANG BZHIN MED PA’I STONG NYID KHONG DU CHUD PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU

The wise, on the other hand, gain a different understanding when they see these statements that “fresh karma comes about through the factor of misunderstanding.”  That is, they grasp them as saying, and only saying, that these examples of fresh karma are perfectly empty of any nature of their own.


[2919]
MA ZAD KYI, RTEN ‘BYUNG GI DE NYID RTOGS PA’I BLO BZANG PO’I NYI MAS, MUN PA STUG PO DANG ‘DRA BA’I MA RIG PA RNAM PAR BSAL BA STE SPONG ZHING,

Not only that, but they use the bright sun of their fine minds to delve the suchness of interdependence itself, and thus dispel—completely—that misunderstanding which is so similar to a thick fog.  Which is to say, they eliminate this darkness within themselves.


[2920]
LAS ‘DU [f. 207a] BYED DAG KYANG NYE BAR MI LEN TE, LAS DE NYE BAR LEN PA’I RGYU MA RIG PA SPANGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This also means then that they never take on any fresh karma; for they have abandoned the misunderstanding that would allow them to take this on.


[2921]
DE’I PHYIR ‘KHOR BA LAS NGES PAR GROL BAR ‘GYUR TE, SDUD PA LAS,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ GANG ZHIG RTEN CING
‘BREL ‘BYUNG LA,
,SKYE MED ZAD PA MED PAR SHES RAB
‘DIS SHES TE,
,NYI MA SPRIN MED ‘OD ZER ‘PHRO BAS
MUN BSAL LTAR,
,MA RIG THIBS PO BCOM NAS RANG ‘BYUNG
THOB PAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And because of this, they are quite certainly liberated from the cycle of pain.  As the Brief Presentation of the Perfection of Wisdom puts it,

Think of a bodhisattva
	Who uses their wisdom

	To grasp how things
	That occur in interdependence

	Never grow, and
	Never come to an end.

	They are like the sun
	Freed from clouds,
	Whose rays of light
	Banish the darkness;

	They destroy the overcast
	Of misunderstanding,
	And achieve the state
	Of the self-made ones.


	[2922]
[VI.107]
Na tattvataś cet khalu santi bhāvās
teṣām asattvaṃ vyavahārato’pi,
Syād eva vandhyātana yasya yadvat
svabhāvataḥ sattvam ato’sti teṣām.

,GAL TE DNGOS RNAMS DE NYID DU MED NA,
,THA SNYAD DU YANG MO GSHAM BU JI BZHIN,
,DE DAG MED PA NYID ‘GYUR DE YI PHYIR,
,DE DAG RANG BZHIN GYIS NI YOD PA NYID,

		If it’s the case
	That all these things
	Have nothing
	In & of themselves,

	Then they are like
	The child of
	A barren woman,
	
	And the same
	In a nominal sense:
	They really do
	Possess none.

	And then
	For that reason,
	They could exist
	Only by nature.


[2923]
GAL TE DE LTAR GZUGS SOGS KYI DNGOS PO RNAMS DE NYID DU STE DON DAM PAR RANG BZHIN ‘GA’ YANG MED NA, MO GSHAM GYI BU JI LTA BA BZHIN DU, 

Now suppose the following thought occurs to someone—

And so if it’s the case that all these things such as physical form and the like have no nature of their own at all—at least in & of themselves, or ultimately speaking—then in a sense they are like the child of a barren woman.


[2924]
THA SNYAD DU YANG SNGO SOGS DE DAG GI RANG BZHIN TE NGO BO MED PA NYID DU ‘GYUR NA, GZUGS SOGS KYI NGO BO NI KUN RDZOB TU YOD PA YANG YIN PA DE YI PHYIR, DE DAG GI YOD PA NI RANG BZHIN GYIS TE DON DAM PAR YOD PA NYID DE KHO NA’O SNYAM NA,

But if it’s the same in a nominal sense—which is to say, if these things like blue and the rest really do possess no nature or essence—then the essential nature of form and the rest must be that they exist deceptively.  And then for that reason, it would seem to me that all the same they could exist only in some kind of real way—that their existence would be something that existed by nature.


	[2925]
[VI.108]
Keśādayas te na hi nāma jātā
ye taimirāder viṣayaṃ prayānti,
Ta eva tāvat khalu codanīyāḥ
paścād avidyātimirānujātāḥ.

,GANG DAG RAB RIB CAN SOGS YUL ‘GYUR BA,
,SKRA SHAD LA SOGS DE DAG MA SKYES PAS,
,RE ZHIG DE DAG NYID LA BRTZAD BYA STE,
,PHYI NAS MA RIG RAB RIB RJES ‘BREL LA’O,

	Strands of hair
	Or the like act
	As objects

	For a person
	Who possesses
	Cataracts or such;

	And these
	Have never started.

	So let’s assume first
	That we seek out
	The way that
	Things really are.

	After that,
	There’s the connection
	To the cataracts
	Of misunderstanding.


[2926]
‘DI LA BRJOD PAR BYA STE, GANG DAG RAB RIB CAN LA SOGS PA’I BLO’I YUL DU ‘GYUR BA’I SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA DE DAG MA SKYES PAS NA, MA SKYES PAR MO GSHAM GYI BU DANG MTSUNGS PA LA,

To this thought we reply as follows.  The mind of a person who possesses cataracts or such sees strands of hair or the like that act as its objects.  And if these objects have never started, then in their not starting they are totally equivalent to the child of a barren woman.


[2927]
CI’I PHYIR KHYED CAG GIS YOD PA MIN PA’I YUL SKRA SHAD SOGS MTHONG LA, MO GSHAM GYI BU MI MTHONG BA CI YIN ZHES,

And then we would have to ask you a question: Why is it that you would see things like that strand of hair that didn’t exist; but not see this child of a barren woman?


[2928]
RE ZHIG SNGON LA RAB RIB LA SOGS PAS MIG NYAMS PA DE DAG NYID DE KHO NA LA BRTZAD PAR BYA STE, DE’I PHYI NAS TE RJES SU NI CI’I PHYIR RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PAR MTSUNGS PA LA,

So let’s assume first that—prior to anything—the eye as been degraded because of a cataract or something of the like.  And then we use these same eyes to seek out the way things really are.  Why then, after that—subsequent to that—wouldn’t things be just the same, in the sense of not arising through some nature of their own?


[2929]
KHYOD GZUGS SOGS MTHONG LA MO GSHAM GYI BU MI MTHONG BA CI YIN ZHES, MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB RJES SU ‘BREL BA STE DES BLO MIG BSGRIBS PA RNAMS LA BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PAR BYA’O,,

And then we would ask you, why is it that you could see forms and the like, but not see the child of a barren woman?  That is, now we are arguing about—now we are examining—the connection to the cataracts of misunderstanding: those things that obscure the eyes of the mind.


[2930]
KHO BO [f. 207b] CAG LA NI ‘DI BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PAR BYA BA MA YIN TE, ‘DI LTAR KHO BO CAG LA NI RNAL ‘BYOR PA RNAMS KYIS DNGOS PO DAG ‘DI LTAR GZIGS SHING, GZHAN GANG DAG RNAL ‘BYOR BA’I YE SHES THOB PAR ‘DOD PA DE DAG GIS KYANG, CHOS KYI RANG BZHIN DE SKAD BSHAD PA LA LHAG PAR MOS PAR BYA’O ZHES

As for our part, it’s not as if we are arguing about or examining these things.  As far as we’re concerned, those deep practitioners are checking into entities in this way; and other people who hope to attain the wisdom of these deep ones (as the scriptures tell us) need to follow a simple aspiration to reach this nature of things as it has been described to us.


[2931]
LUNG JI LTA BA BZHIN DU RNAL ‘BYOR PA’I YE SHES KYIS THUGS SU CHUD PA’I SGO NAS, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN MED PAR ‘CHAD PAR ZHUGS PA YIN GYI, RANG GI SHES PA LA LTOS NAS NI MA YIN TE, KHO BO CAG NI MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB KYIS BLO’I MIG BSGRIBS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Which is to say, we need to follow these scriptures and try to grasp the wisdom of these deep practitioners; thus then we engage in the explanations of how things lack any nature of their own.  It is not though the case that we could rely on our own understanding, for we remain people who find the eyes of their mind obstructed by the cataracts of misunderstanding.


[2932]
JI SKAD DU MDO LAS,
,PHUNG PO RANG BZHIN DBEN ZHING STONG PA NYID,
,BYANG CHUB RANG BZHIN STONG ZHING DBEN PA NYID,
,GANG SPYOD DE YANG RANG BZHIN STONG PA STE,
,YE SHES LDAN PAS SHES KYI BYIS PAS MIN,

This entire situation is as we see it described in the sutras:

	The parts to the person
	Are devoid of any nature,
	And simple emptiness.

	Enlightenment itself
	Is empty of any nature,
	And thus that absent void.

	Whatever we try to do
	Is as well empty
	Of any nature of its own.

	These are things
	That are understood
	By those who possess wisdom;
	But not by infants.	


	[2933]
,YE SHES RANG BZHIN STONG PAR RIG ‘GYUR TE,
,SHES BYA’I RANG BZHIN STONG PAR RIG GYUR NAS,
,SHES PA PO DANG ‘DRA BAR RTOGS GYUR NA,
,BYANG CHUB LAM LA DE DAG SPYOD CES BYA,
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

	Come to see
	That wisdom itself
	Is empty of any nature;

	See that is empty
	Of any nature
	Of being an existent thing.

	When you realize
That these things
Are similar to the knower,

Then we can say
You are one of those
Who is practicing the path
To enlightenment.


[2934]
DE’I PHYIR ‘DI NI RNAL ‘BYOR PA RNAMS LA BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PA MA YIN TE, DE DAG GIS NI KUN RDZOB TU YANG CHOS ‘GA’ ZHIG LA NGO BOS GRUB PA’I RANG BZHIN ‘GA’ YANG MA GZIGS LA, DON DAM PAR YANG CI YANG MA GZIGS SO,,

As such, it is not the case that all this is meant to be conjecture or argument with those deep practitioners.  They for their part see no kind of nature in any kind of thing at all, where these could exist through some essential nature of their own, even deceptively.  Neither do they see how these could have any such nature in an ultimate way.


	[2935]
[VI.109]
Svapnaṃ sagandharva puraṃ marīcyāṃ
kam indrajālaṃ pratibimbakādi,
Paśyasyajātān yadi tat kathaṃ te
tulye’py asattvena tu tan na yuktam.

,GAL TE RMI LAM DRI ZA’I GRONG KHYER BCAS,
,SMIG RGYU’I CHU DANG MIG ‘PHRUL GZUGS BRNYAN SOGS,
,SKYE MED MTHONG NA YOD NYID MIN MTSUNGS KYANG,
,KHYOD LA JI LTAR DER ‘GYUR DE MI RIGS,

		Now suppose there is
		A dream, along
With a city of the
Craving spirits.

Or water flowing
From a mirage—
An illusionist at work—
Or a reflection,

Or something
Of the like:
Things that
Never started.

When we come to see,
We can say that
They are equivalent

In not being
Existing entities.

And you should be
Asking, how are
All these things?

It doesn’t make sense!


[2936]
RAB RIB CAN LA BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PA LTA BAR ZHOG CIG RE ZHIG ‘DI NI KHYOD NYID LA BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PAR BYA BA YIN NO ZHES BSHAD PA,

And then the root text goes on to say, “Not only are we not making conjectures or examinations with those who are afflicted with the cataracts; right now the one that we’re doing the conjecturing and the examining towards is you yourself.”  Here is how that is expressed.


[2937]
GAL TE RMI LAM GYI KHANG KHYIM DANG DRI ZA’I GRONG KHYER DANG BCAS PA MTHONG BA DANG, MIG ‘PHRUL MKHAN GYIS SPRUL PA’I SKYES PA DANG BUD MED SOGS DANG, [f. 208a] SMIG RGYU LA CHU DANG, GZUGS BRNYAN LA BYAD BZHIN DU MTHONG BA DANG,

Now suppose that we see a dream house; along with a city of the craving spirits.  Or we see something like a man or woman who has been emanated by an illusionist.  We see water flowing from a mirage; or we see the reflection of a thing in the mirror as being the thing standing in front of the mirror.


[2938]
SOGS KYIS BRAG CHA DANG SPRUL PA SOGS LA SKYE MED DE YOD PA MIN PA MTHONG BA NA YOD PA NYID MIN PAR MTSUNGS KYANG,

And then the words “or something of the like” here refer to things like the echo of a sound, or else an emanation created by someone—things that never started.  When we come to see that these are not things that have any existence at all, we can say that they are equivalent in not being existing entities.


[2939]
KHYOD LA JI LTAR DE DAG MTHONG BA DER ‘GYUR LA, MO GSHAM GYI BU MTHONG BA DER MI ‘GYUR BA DE MI RIGS SO ZHES JE {%DE? our scan says JE} BDAG NYID LA BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PAR GYIS LA, PHYIS KHO BO LA BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PAR BYA’O,,

And so first of all you should be conjecturing and examining you yourself, asking “How is it that you can see all these things, and not see the child of a barren woman?  It doesn’t make sense!”  When you’re done with that, then later you can conjecture and examine what we think!


	[2940]
[VI.110]
Ete na tattvena yathaiva jātā
na vāpi vandhyāsutavan na yānti,
Lokasya yad darśana gocaratvaṃ
tasmād anaikāntikam etad uktam.

,DE NYID DU ‘DI JI LTAR SKYE MED KYANG,
,MO GSHAM BU LTAR GANG PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN GYI,
,MTHONG BA’I YUL DU MI ‘GYUR MA YIN PA,
,DE YI PHYIR NA SMRA ‘DI MA NGES PA’O,

		Speaking purely,
		Things never start
		In any way at all.

		And yet this is not
		Something that can be
		An object that is seen

		In the eyes of the
		Everyday world,

		In the way that
		They would regard
		The child of
		A barren woman.

		And since it is not,
		This statement
		Is itself inconclusive.


[2941]
DE’I PHYIR DE KHO NA NYID DU GZUGS SOGS ‘DI JI LTAR YANG SKYE BA MED KYANG, GANG GI PHYIR MO GSHAM GYI BU LTAR ‘JIG RTEN GYI MTHONG BA’I YUL DU MI ‘GYUR BA MA YIN PA DE YI PHYIR, DON DAM DU MED NA THA SNYAD DU YANG MO GSHAM GYI BU BZHIN MI MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES SMRA BA ‘DI NI GTAN TSIGS MA NGES PA STE, ‘KHRUL PA CAN YIN NO,,

Thus we can say that form and the like—when we are speaking about their pure essence—are things that never start in any way at all.  And yet this is not something that can be an object that is seen in the eyes of the everyday world, in the way that they would regard the child of a barren woman.  And since it is not, then this statement where you say that “If something didn’t exist in an ultimate way, then even nominally it should act like the child of a barren woman, and not be something we could see,” is itself reasoning which is inconclusive—which is to say, faulty.


[2942]
BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS KYANG,
,’GRO BA DAG NI RMI ‘DRAR BSHAD,
,DE NYID DU NI RNAM MA BZHAG
,RMI LAM GANG LA DNGOS PO MED,
,LOG PA’I BLO LDAN MNGON PAR ZHEN,

The Conqueror himself has put it this way:

	What I have explained
	Is that all these living beings
	Are something like a dream;

	They cannot be described
	As existing in actual fact.

	Those with a mistaken
	State of mind
	Hold strongly to what

	Is a thing in a dream
	That never existed.


	[2943]
,DRI ZA’I GRONG KHYER JI LTAR SNANG GYUR KYANG,
,GRONG KHYER PHYOGS BCUR YOD MIN GZHAN NA’ANG MED,
,GRONG KHYER MING TZAM ZHIG GIS RAB TU BZHAG
,DE BZHIN BDE BAR GSHEGS PAS ‘GRO ‘DI GZIGS,

The city of the ghosts
Can appear all it wants;

But still it is not
A city that could exist
In any of the ten
Directions of space,
Nor anywhere else.

It exists as a city
Only in name;

And this is how
Those who have
Gone to Bliss

See every living being.


	[2944]
,CHU YI ‘DU SHES CAN GYIS NI,
,MTHONG YANG SMIG RGYU LA CHU MED,
,DE BZHIN YONGS SU RTOG PAS DKRUGS,
,SDUG PA MIN PAR SDUG PAR RTOG

Those who think
They see some water
May indeed
Believe they see it;

But that doesn’t mean
The mirage will be filled
With water.

Those full of delusion
Are confused in just
The very same way,

Seeing what is anything
But beautiful
As being beautiful indeed.


	[2945]
,ME LONG SHIN TU YONGS DAG LA,
,JI LTAR RANG BZHIN MED PA YI,
,GZUGS BRNYAN SNANG BA DE BZHIN DU,
,LJON PA CHOS RNAMS SHES PAR GYIS,

Everything is just the way
That a reflection that has
No real nature

Makes its appearance
In mirror that is perfectly clean;

Now you can look
At things like trees this way.


[2946]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I LUNG LAS NA GZUGS SOGS RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES [f. 208b] PA YIN BZHIN DU, ‘JIG RTEN GYI ‘DZIN PA’I YUL NYID DU ‘GYUR LA, MO GSHAM GYI BU NI MA YIN PAS ‘DI NI KHYOD RANG NYID LAS MA NGES PA’O,,

According to this original citation from scripture, form and the rest arise, but not through any nature of their own.  And then in the same way they serve as the very objects that are held to by the world.  The child of a barren woman though is not like this; therefore this would be uncertain, even according to you.


[2947]
KHO BO CAG LA NI ‘DI BRTZAD DU MED PA NYID DE, ‘DI LTAR KHO BO CAG GIS NI GZUGS LA SOGS PA RNAMS KUN RDZOB TU RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BAR KHAS BLANGS NAS DON DAM PAR ‘GOG PA MA YIN NO,,

For us, this point is something that is—quite certainly—beyond any need to dig further.  That is, we accept that form and the rest arise through a deceptive nature; and so we are not denying them in any ultimate way.



A summary of the refutation

[2948]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to a summary presentation of our refutation of debate about the denial that was made.


	[2949]
[VI.111]
Svenātmanā janma na tattvato’sti
vandhyā sutasyāpi na lokato’pi,
Tathā svabhāvena na lokato’mī
jātā na tattvena ca sarva bhāvāḥ.

,MO GSHAM BU LA RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS,
,SKYE BA DE NYID DU MED ‘JIG RTEN DU’ANG,
,YOD MIN DE BZHIN DNGOS ‘DI KUN NGO BO,
,NYID KYIS ‘JIG RTEN DE NYID DU MA SKYES,

		The child
		Of a barren woman
		Is not something

		Which arises
		All on its own accord;

		It has no existence
		In & of itself.

		Neither is it
Something which exists,
In the everyday world.

Just so,
All these entities
Have never arisen through
		Some essential nature;

		For the world, or from
		The point of view
		Of suchness.
 

[2950]
KHYOD KYI LUGS KYIS GZUGS SOGS RNAMS KUN RDZOB TU RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BAR DMIGS NAS, DON DAM DU ‘GOG PA MIN PA DE CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA,

One may begin here with the following question—

According to your system, form and the like are perceived as arising, deceptively speaking, through a nature of their own; and this is not to be denied, in an ultimate sense.  Why is that?


[2951]
JI LTAR MO GSHAM GYI BU LA RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS SKYE BA DE KHO NA NYID DU MED CING ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD DU’ANG YOD PA MIN PA

Here is what has been stated.  Think first of how the child of a barren woman is not something which arises all on its own accord: how it has no existence in & of itself.  Neither is it something which exists, in the parlance of the everyday world.


[2952]
DE BZHIN DU, GZUGS SOGS KYI DNGOS PO ‘DI KUN ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD DANG, DE KHO NA NYID GNYIS KAR RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS MA SKYES SO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS,

Just so is it the case that all these entities of form and the rest have never arisen through some essential nature of their own—whether we’re talking about this parlance of the world, or from the point of view of suchness.


[2953]
DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS SKYE BAR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘KHRUL NGOR YOD PA LA DBU MA PAS, KUN RDZOB TU YOD PAR GTAN MI ‘DOD LA, NGO BO NYID KYIS SKYE BA ZHES DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR GSAL BAR YANG SBYAR BA RNAMS DRAN PAR BYA’O,,

As such, you should recall how those of the Middle Way talk about the way in which things exist to the perceptions of one who is mistaken; who holds that they could grow through some essential nature of their own.  That is, they would never accept—in the slightest—that these existed in a deceptive manner.  And remember too the way in which they add a qualification to the object they deny: “It does not grow through any essential nature of its own.”


	[2954]
[VI.112]
Dharmān jagādādita eva śāntān
ataḥ prakṛtyā parinirvṛtāṃś ca,
Śāstā viyuktān udayena sarvān
yatas tato nāsti sad eva janma.

,DE PHYIR ‘DI LTAR STON PAS CHOS RNAMS KUN,
,GDOD NAS ZHI ZHING SKYE BRAL RANG BZHIN GYIS,
,YONGS SU MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA GSUNGS GYUR PA,
,DE PHYIR RTAG TU SKYE BA YOD MA YIN,

		For this reason,
		The Teacher has stated
		That all the objects
		That exist consist

		Of peace from
		The very beginning;

		And are devoid
		Of arising;

		And that they have,
		By their very nature,
		Gone entirely to nirvana.

		As such,
		They have never
		Displayed any arising.


[2955]
GANG GI PHYIR DE LTA YIN PA DE’I PHYIR ‘DI LTAR STON PA BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS CHOS RNAMS KUN GDOD MA NAS ZHI ZHING RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA DANG BRAL BA DANG, RANG BZHIN GYIS YONGS SU MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA’O ZHES GSUNGS PAR GYUR PA DE’I PHYIR DUS RTAG TU RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

For the reason that this is the way things are, the Teacher—the Conqueror—has stated that all the objects that exist consist of peace from the very beginning; and that they are devoid of arising through any nature of their own; and that they have—by their very nature—gone entirely to nirvana.  As such, they are things which have never, for all of time, displayed any arising through some nature of their own.


[2956]
GSUNGS TSUL NI, DKON MCHOG SPRIN LAS,
,CHOS KYI ‘KHOR LO BSKOR BA NA,
,GDOD NAS ZHI ZHING MA SKYES PA,
,RANG BZHIN MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA YI,
,CHOS RNAMS MGON PO [f. 209a] KHYOD KYIS BSTAN,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And how was it that these things were stated?  We can point to the following words from the Cloud of Jewels:

	When you turned
	The wheel of the Dharma,
	O Protector,

	You taught us that
	All things had a nature
	Of nirvana—

	Peace from
The very beginning,
	And never born at all.


[2957]
CHOS RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID NI YE SHES ZHI BA’I YUL YIN PA’I PHYIR ZHI BA’O, ,DE’I RGYU MTSAN NI RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Since the very nature of all existing entities is the object of peace in the form of wisdom, they are here being referred to as “peace.”  The reason for saying this is that they have never arisen through any nature of their own.


[2958]
DE’I RGYU MTSAN YANG GAL TE ‘GA’ ZHIG LA RANG BZHIN TE NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA YOD NA, DE SKYE BAR ‘GYUR NA RANG BZHIN DE YANG YOD PA MIN PAS CI ZHIG SKYE BAR ‘GYUR, DE’I PHYIR MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA STE RNAM PAR DAG PA’O,,

And this in itself has a reason.  Suppose that there did exist some number of entities that did exist through some nature of their own—through some essential quality.  If they were to grow then, then they could no longer have that nature; what then is it that grew?  As such, these things are described as “nirvana”; which is to say, as being completely pure.


[2959]
GDOD NAS ZHES PA NI CHOS DE DAG RNAL ‘BYOR PA’I YE SHES KYI SKABS KHO NAR MA SKYES PA NI MIN TE,

When it says here “from the very beginning,” the point is that it is not the case that these entities are something that exhibits no growing only with reference to the occasion of the wisdom of a deep practitioner.


[2960]
‘O NA CI ZHE NA, DE’I GONG ROL ‘JIG RTEN PA’I THA SNYAD KYI SKABS SU YANG CHOS DE DAG RANG GI BDAG NYID KYIS MA SKYES PA’O ZHES PA ‘DI STON PAR BYED DE, GDOD KYI SGRA NI DANG PO’I SGRA’I RNAM GRANGS SO,,

And how does that work?  What this is meant to indicate is that even before that point—even on the occasion when we are speaking nominally—none of these entities has arisen in and of itself.  That is, the expression “the very beginning” is intended as a synonym for saying “the very start.”


	[2961]
[VI.113]
Ghaṭādayaḥ santi na tattvato’mī
loka prasiddhyā tu yathā bhavanti,
Bhāvā bhaviṣyanti tathaiva sarve
syān naiva vandhyā sutavat prasaṅgaḥ.

,BUM SOGS ‘DI DAG DE NYID DU MED CING,
,’JIG RTEN RAB TU GRAGS PAR YOD CI BZHIN,
,DE BZHIN DNGOS PO THAMS CAD ‘BYUNG [*’GYUR?] BAS NA,
,MO GSHAM BU DANG MTSUNGS PAR THAL MI ‘GYUR,

		Things like
		Pitchers and the like
		Are not such that
		
		They exist
		In their essence;

		They do though
Exist as they are
Spoken of in the
World at large.

All the entities
That exist
Follow this
Very same pattern;

It is not the case
That they would
Have to be

The equivalent
Of the child
Of a barren woman.


[2962]
RANG GI SDE PA RNAMS KYIS NI DON DAM DU MED NA, KUN RDZOB TU YANG MED DO ZHES PA’I BRGAL BA ‘DI BYA BA MA YIN TE, CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA,

One may continue with the following question:

Those of our own group say that it is a mistake to present the argument that “If something doesn’t exist ultimately, then neither can it exist deceptively.”  Why is that?


[2963]
GANG GI PHYIR DE DAG GIS KHAS BLANGS PA BUM SOGS ‘DI DAG DE NYID DU STE DON DAM PAR MED CING ‘JIG RTEN GYI RAB TU GRAGS PA STE THA SNYAD DU YOD PA

This is for the reason that what they accept goes as follows.  First of all, things like pitchers and the like are not such that they exist in their essence; which is to say, in an ultimate sense.  They do though exist as they are spoken of in the world at large; which is to say, they do exist in a nominal sense.


[2964]
JI BZHIN PA DE BZHIN DU, DNGOS PO THAMS CAD KYANG ‘GYUR BAS NA, DON DAM PAR MED NA MO GSHAM GYI BU DANG MTSUNGS PAR THAL BAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

All the entities that exist also follow this very same pattern.  That is, it is not the case that if a thing has no existence in an ultimate sense, then it would have to be the equivalent of the child of a barren woman.


[2965]
‘DI NI MDZOD LAS,
,GANG LA BCOM DANG BLO YIS GZHAN,
,BSAL NA DE BLO MI ‘JUG PA,
,BUM CHU BZHIN DU KUN RDZOB TU,
,YOD DE DON DAM YOD GZHAN NO,
ZHES BSHAD PA LTAR TE,

The way this works is expressed in the Treasure House of Higher Knowledge as follows—

	Consider any object
	That—when you destroy it,
	Or break it down mentally
	Into its component parts—
	Your mind can no longer
	Engage in it:

	Something, for example,
	Like the water in a pitcher.

	This then is an example
	Of deceptive reality;
	Whereas the ultimate
	Would be something other.
	

[2966]
CHA SHAS SU BCOM PAS DE’I BLO MI ‘JUG PA’I KUN RDZOB TU YOD PA STE DPER NA BUM PA LTA BU’O,,

What this is saying is that any object which exists in a way where—if you broke it down into its component parts—the mind could no longer engage in it, is an example of deceptive reality.  And an example would be something like a clay pitcher.
	

[2967]
DE LA NI GYO MOR BCOM NA BUM PA’I BLO MI ‘JUG PA’O, ,[f. 209b] BLOS CHOS GZHAN BSAL NA DE’I BLO MI ‘JUG PA YANG KUN RDZOB TU YOD PA STE DPER NA CHU LTA BU’O,,

If you take a pitcher and smash it into shards of clay, then the conception of it as a pitcher can no longer engage.  And things that cannot be engaged in when you break them down mentally are also said to exist deceptively; an example would be water.


[2968]
DE LA NI BLOS GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I CHOS GZHAN BSAL NA CHU’I BLO MI ‘JUG GO

That is, when the mind breaks down the form and other components of the water, the conception of it as water can no longer engage.


[2969]
,GANG LA BCOM YANG DE’I BLO ‘JUG LA, BLOS CHOS GZHAN BSAL YANG DE’I BLO ‘JUG PA NI DON DAM PAR YOD PA YIN TE, DPER NA GZUGS LTA BU’O,,

And suppose that you were to break the object down, but the mind could still engage in it.  Any case where the mind breaks the thing down into component parts and can still engage in the object is what they consider to exist ultimately: an example would be form itself.


[2970]
DE LA NI RDUL PHRA RAB TU BCOM YANG RUNG, BLOS RO LA SOGS PA’I CHOS GZHAN BSAL YANG RUNG, GZUGS KYI RANG BZHIN BLO ‘JUG PA NYID DO,,

That is, you could break the thing down into smallest particles; or the mind could break the object down into other entities, such as taste or the like.  But still the mind would invariably engage in the thing as having the nature of form.


[2971]
TSOR BA SOGS LA YANG DE BZHIN DU BLTA BAR BYA’O, ZHES MDZOD ‘GREL DU ‘CHAD DO,,

And the commentary to the Treasure House says that “you should view feelings and the like as being the same.”


[2972]
SDE PA DE DAG GIS NI SPYIR DON DAM DU MED NA KUN RDZOB TU MED DO ZHES SMRA BA MI RIGS SO, ZHES GSUNG PA YIN GYI DE DAG GIS BDEN PA GNYIS SU YOD TSUL BYAS PA DANG, RANG GIS MDZAD PA GNYIS MTHUN PAR STON PA MIN TE, DE DAG GIS KUN RDZOB TU YOD PAR BZHAG PA LA DBU MA PAS BSHAD PA’I DON DAM DU YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA SHA STAG YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

These groups would, in general, say things like “It would be incorrect to say that if something did not exist ultimately, it could not exist in a deceptive way.”  This is not though indicating that the way that they say there exists a division of realities into two, and the way that we ourselves set forth two, are compatible with each other.  And that’s because every single thing that they would establish as existing in a deceptive way is something that those of the Middle Way would consider to exist in an ultimate way.


[2973]
GAL TE BUM PA LA SOGS PAR GDAGS PA’I RTEN ‘BYUNG BA BZHI DANG, ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR BZHI LA SOGS PA RNAMS RDZAS GRUB TU YOD PA’I PHYIR, BUM PA LA SOGS PAR BTAGS PA NI RGYU ‘AM GZHI DANG BCAS PAR RIGS NA DBU MA PA LTAR NA CHOS THAMS CAD BTAGS PA TZAM KHO NA YIN GYI, BTAGS PA’I RTEN RDZAS SU GRUB PA CI YANG MED PA LA MO GSHAM GYI BU DANG ‘DRA BAR THAL BA LDOG PA MED DO SNYAM NA,

One might then have the following thought—

Let’s consider the four elements, and the four products of the elements, and so on which provide the basis for labeling something as a pitcher or the like.  These exist substantially, and so suppose that it is acceptable to say that when we label a pitcher or something similar, there is an accompanying cause or basis.  According to those of the Middle Way, every object in the universe exists only as something labeled, but there is never any basis for the labeling that could substantially.  As such there is no avoiding the necessary implication that everything would be like the child of a barren woman.


[2974]
DE YANG MI RIGS TE, BTAGS PA’I RTEN RDZAS SU GRUB PAR SGRUB PAR MI NUS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And yet this is incorrect, since there is no way of proving that the basis for the labeling exists in a substantial manner.


[2975]
DPER NA BTAGS PAR YOD PA BYAD BZHIN LA SOGS PA’I TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS [f. 210a] GZUGS BRNYAN BRTAGS PA TZAM DMIGS PA DANG, BTAGS PAR YOD PA KA BA SOGS LA BRTEN NAS KHYIM DU BTAGS PA DANG, DE BZHIN DU SHING GI RTEN CAN NAGS BTAGS PA DANG,

We can see, for example, things that exist through labeling: a reflection in a mirror is something that only exists through labeling, based upon the collection of parts involving the original image standing before the mirror, and so on.  And then there are other things that exist through labeling; the idea of a “house,” for example, is imputed on the basis of its supporting pillars and the like.


[2976]
JI LTAR RMI LAM NA MA SKYES PA’I RANG BZHIN CAN GYI SA BON LAS MA SKYES PA’I RANG BZHIN GYI MYU GU SKYE BAR DMIGS PA DE BZHIN DU, DNGOS PO BTAGS PAR YOD PA THAMS CAD KYI GDAGS GZHI YANG DNGOS PO BTAGS PAR YOD PA NYID DU RIGS SO,,

In a dream, we observe a sprout that has a nature of never arising arising from a seed that has a nature of never arising.  Just so, it is logical to say that the bases that we use to label all those entities which exist as creations of lables are themselves invariably entities which exist as creations of labels.



Dependence stops the mistake

[2977]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third part from before: an explanation of how the concept that things start in dependence prevents mistaken ideas where we hold to extremes.


	[2978]
[VI.114]
Ahetutaś ceśvara kāraṇādeḥ
svasmāt parasmāt dvayataś ca yasmād,
Utpadyamānā na hi santi bhāvās
tasmāt pratītya prabhavaṃ prayānti.

,GANG PHYIR RGYU MED PA DANG DBANG PHYUG GI
,RGYU LA SOGS DANG BDAG GZHAN GNYIS KA LAS,
,DNGOS RNAMS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA MA YIN PA,
,DE PHYIR BRTEN NAS RAB TU SKYE BAR ‘GYUR,

	It is indeed the case
	That these entities
	Do not arise without
	Any cause at all;

	Nor from the cause
	Of some supreme
Being, or the like.

And because
These do not arise
From themselves,

From something other,
Or from both,

Their arisal
Most definitely flows
From a dependence.


[2979]
GAL TE KHYOD KYIS BDAG DANG GZHAN DANG GNYIS KA DANG RGYU MED PA LAS SKYE BA BDEN GNYIS KYI PHYOGS GNYIS KAR YANG BKAG NA, MA RIG PA LA SOGS PA LAS ‘DU BYED RNAM PAR SHES PA LA SOGS PA DANG, SA BON LA SOGS PA LAS MYU GU LA SOGS PA KUN RDZOB TU SKYE BA DE JI LTAR NGES PAR BYA ZHE NA,

One may next come with this following question:

You have denied—from the point of view of both of the two realities—that things could arise from themselves; from something other than themselves; from both themselves and from something other; and without any cause at all.  If this is indeed the case, then how is it that we can confirm that things do arise in a deceptive sense—that fresh karma and consciousness and the rest can come from misunderstanding and the like; and sprouts & such from seeds and so on?


[2980]
DE LA BRJOD PAR BYA STE, GANG GI PHYIR NA SNGAR JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I TSUL GYIS, DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI SKYE BA RGYU MED PAR NGO BO NYID LAS ‘BYUNG BA DANG, DBANG PHYUG GI RGYU DANG

We’ll explain our answer here.  It is indeed the case—in the manner that we provided the previous explanation—that the arisal of entities is not something where things have somehow occurred in and of themselves, their birth occurring without any cause at all; nor have they grown from causes such as some supreme being, or the like.


[2981]
LA SOGS PAS DUS DANG, RDUL DANG RANG BZHIN DANG SKYES BU DANG SRED MED KYI BU LA SOGS PA RNAMS LAS KYANG SKYE BA MA YIN ZHING,

The phrase “or the like” here, by the way, covers things coming from the concept of time; or from particulate matter; or from some nature to things; or from some special person; or from the one they call “child beyond desire”; or any such thing.


[2982]
BDAG DANG GZHAN DANG GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA MIN PA DE’I PHYIR RGYU DANG RKYEN ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS ‘BRAS BU ‘DI RAB TU SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG STE, MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA SPANGS PA DE TZAM ZHIG LA ‘JIG RTEN GYI RGYU ‘BRAS KYI THA SNYAD MI BCAD PA’I DON DU RTEN NO,,

And simply because these results do not arise from themselves, from something other than themselves, or from both of these, their arisal most definitely flows from a dependence upon the specific causes and factors.  The point is that the very denial that things could arise through any one of the four extreme options itself relies upon the fact that we are not eliminating the expression, in the everyday world, of how cause & effect works.


[2983]
JI SKAD DU BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS DE LA CHOS KYI BRDA NI ‘DI YIN TE, ‘DI LTA STE ‘DI YOD NA ‘DI ‘BYUNG, ‘DI SKYES PAS ‘DI SKYE STE, GANG ‘DI MA RIG PA’I RKYEN GYIS ‘DU BYED [f. 210b] RNAMS ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA GSUNGS PA DANG,

The expressions that the Conqueror has given to this idea in the classical teachings are things like the following—

This is how it is.  If this is present, then this will occur.  If this has arisen, then this will arise.  What this is is where the factor of misunderstanding leads to fresh karma, and…


[2984]
RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,’DI YOD PAS NA ‘DI ‘BYUNG DPER,
,RING PO YOD NA THUNG NGU BZHIN,
,’DI SKYES PAS NA ‘DI SKYE DPER,
,MAR ME ‘BYUNG BAS ‘OD BZHIN NO,
ZHES DANG,

As the String of Precious Jewels puts it,

	If this is present,
	Then that will occur;

	It’s like, for example,
	There is short
	Wherever there is long.

	If this has arisen,
	Then that will arise;

	It’s like where
	Light occurs
	If a lamp does.


[2985]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,BYED PO LAS LA BRTEN BYAS SHING,
,LAS KYANG BYED PO DE NYID LA,
,BRTEN NAS ‘BYUNG BA MA GTOGS PAR,
,’GRUB PA’I RGYU NI MA MTHONG NGO,

Wisdom says as well—

	An agent is created
	Dependent upon its action.

	An action as well
	Comes about in dependence
	On nothing less
	Than its agent.
	
	Aside from this,
	We can see
	No cause which would
	Establish them.	


	[2986]
,DE BZHIN NYER LEN SHES PAR BYA,
,LAS DANG BYED PO GSAL PHYIR RO,
,LAS DANG BYED PA PO DAG GIS,
,DNGOS PO LHAG MA SHES PAR BYA,

One should understand
	Taking things on
	In just the same way,

	For we have dispelled
	Actions and agents.

Agents and actions
	Can be used
	To understand
	The rest of things.


[2987]
ZHES ‘DI TZAM ZHIG KHO NA GSUNGS KYI MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA MA GSUNGS SO,,

This by the way is all that was stated; the idea of things arising through the four extreme options was not.


[2988]
DE LTAR RGYAL BAS RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM GYI SKYE BA GSUNGS PA BZHIN DU, ‘PHAGS PAS KYANG DE LTAR MDZAD CING,

And so we can say that—just as the Victors have described an arising to things which occurs through such and such a factor alone—The Realized One has done the same.


[2989]
KHYAD PAR DU BYED PA PO LAS LA BRTEN PA SOGS KYI LTOS ‘BYUNG GI RTEN ‘BREL BZHED PAS, DE MA GTOGS PA ZHES RANG DANG GZHAN LUGS KYI SKYE BA’I KHYAD PAR PHYE ZHING, DE DNGOS PO SRID TSAD LA SBYOR BAR GSUNGS PA DANG,

More particularly, we can say that they accept the idea of dependence in the sense of things occurring through reliance, where the doer depends for example upon the action done.  When the text says “aside from this” here, the point is that our presentation of how things arise is being differentiated from the way in which the other party here describes it; and it’s being stated that this description applies to the entirety of existing entitites.


[2990]
SLOB DPON ‘DIS SPYIR SKYE BA GZHAG DGOS PA DANG, MTHA’ BZHI LAS MI SKYE BA’I PHYIR BRTEN NAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES ‘BAD PA DU MAS BSGRUBS PA LA,

Our master here must necessarily set forth how it is that things arise; and he is establishing—by expending quite considerable efforts—how it is that they arise through dependence, since they cannot arise through any of the four extreme options.


[2991]
MTHA’ BZHI LAS MI SKYE NA SKYE BA GTAN MED DO ZHES LUGS DE DAG LAS PHYIN CI LOG TU BZLOG NAS SMRA BA NI, NGAN RTOG GI DRI MA ‘THUG POS STONG NYID RTOGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN BLA NA MED PA RTEN ‘BYUNG ZAB MO’I DON, STONG PA NYID KYI DON DU ‘CHAR BA’I LUGS BLA NA MED PA LEGS PAR SLOD PA YIN PAR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

And so it is that this other system is the source of the idea where they say that—if things do not arise through any of the four extreme options—then they cannot arise at all.  As such, you should all understand that these people have taken the thick stench of their mistaken ideas and used them to pollute, perfectly, the idea that the profound presentation of how things occur in dependence—the very trigger for realizing emptiness itself—makes its appearance as the true intent of emptiness.  For this is supreme teaching of all.


[2992]
,DE LTAR RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM GYI RTEN ‘BREL BSHAD PA NA, RGYU MED LAS SKYE BA LA SOGS PA BZHI [f. 211a] MI SRID PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI,

And so once we have offered our explanation of a dependence that depends on no more than this one factor behind everything, it becomes impossible for things to have arisen through any of these four choices of having had no cause, and the rest.  But it doesn’t end there!


[2993]
RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PA’I RTAG PAR LTA BA DANG, BYA BYED MI ‘THAD PA’I CHAD PAR LTA BA DANG, DUS SNGA MA NA YOD PA DE NYID DUS PHYI MA RNAMS SU ‘ANG YOD PA’I RTOG PA DANG, RANG BZHIN GYIS SNGA PHYI SO SO BA’I SKAD CIG MA’I MI RTAG PA DANG, DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS POR MED PA GNYIS NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA LA SOGS PAR RTOG PA’ANG BRTAGS PA’I YUL GZHAN DAG KYANG, MI SRID DO ZHES BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Because now, with the following lines of the root text, we will describe how other options here that are products of sheer imagination are flatly impossible.  These include ideas like the following—

The view that things could never change, due to overrating these things and holding them to exist through some nature of their own;

The view that things would simply discontinue, due to the belief that the way everything works in the world is something mistaken;

The notion that the very same things which existed at some previous point in time could also exist at a later point in time;

The idea of a changing nature to things consisting of discrete milliseconds of time which exist, through some nature of their own, either earlier or later; or else

The concept of existents and non-existents—both of them—that could through some essential nature of their own.


	[2994]
[VI.115]
Pratītya bhava prabhavena śakyā
na kalpanāḥ kalpayituṃ yad etāḥ,
Tasmāt pratītyodaya yuktir eṣā
kudṛṣṭi jālaṃ sakalaṃ chinatti.

,GANG PHYIR DNGOS PO BRTEN NAS RAB ‘BYUNG BAS,
,RTOG PA ‘DI DAG BRTAG PAR MI NUS PA,
,DE PHYIR RTEN ‘BYUNG RIGS PA ‘DI YIS NI,
,[210a] LTA NGAN DRA BA MTHA’ DAG GCOD PAR BYED,

		The fact is
		That entities will
		Always spring forth
		In dependence.

		Thus these notions
		Cannot stand up
		Under close examination.

		And thus things
		Occur in dependence [f. 210a];

		This logic serves
		To sever all the cables
		Of the vast net
		Of terrible viewpoints.


[2995]
GANG GI PHYIR RGYU ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS ‘BRAS BU ‘DI RAB TU ‘BYUNG NGO ZHES BYA BA’I RIGS PA ‘DI TZAM ZHIG GIS, DNGOS PO KUN RDZOB PA RNAMS KYI BDAG GI DNGOS PO YOD PA ‘THOB KYI GZHAN DU MA YIN PAS,

The fact is that any particular result will always spring forth dependent upon a particular cause.  Thus this is the only logical statement needed to establish the ontological status of selected entities which are deceptive; and it cannot be otherwise.


[2996]
BDAG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA LA SOGS PA’I RTOG PA ‘DI DAG BRTAG PAR MI NUS PA DE’I PHYIR RTEN CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA NYID KYI RIGS PA ‘DI YIS NI, JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I BDAG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA LA SOGS PAR LTA BA’I LTA BA NGAN PA’I DRA BA MTHA’ DAG GCOD PAR BYED PA YIN NO,,

These notions that things could arise from themselves, or from something other than themselves, or anything of the like cannot stand up under close examination.  And thus it comes down to things occurring in dependence and interconnection; this logic of the particular factor involved.  And this is a logic which serves to sever all the cables of the vast net of terrible viewpoints where people view things in ways such as arising either from themselves or from something other than themselves, in the manner that these are described by these thinkers.


[2997]
‘DI LTAR RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM ZHIG RTEN ‘BREL GYI DON DU ‘JOG PA’I DBU MA PAS NI, DNGOS PO ‘GA’ LA YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHAS MA BLANGS TE,

And thus it is that those of the Middle Way establish the meaning of dependence, as nothing more complicated than talking about this particular factor for things.  They do not agree that any entity that ever exists could come about through some nature of its own.


[2998]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LAS,
,DE DANG DE RTEN GANG ‘BYUNG BA,
,RANG GI NGO BO DER MA SKYES,
,RANG GI NGO BOR GANG MA SKYES,
,DE NI SKYES ZHES JI SKAD BYA,

As the Sixty Verses on the Reasoning behind Emptiness puts it,

Anything which occurs
In dependence
On any particular thing
Cannot have started
In & of itself.

How could you ever say
That something which
Had not yet started,
In & of itself,
Then started?


[2999]
ZHES BRTEN NAS SKYES PA NI RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS MA SKYES PA DANG,

The point being made here is that things which have arisen through dependence cannot have arisen through some essential nature of their own.


[3000]
DE LTA YIN NA MYU GU LA SOGS PA RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS SKYES PAR JI SKAD DU BRJOD PAR BYA ZHES DANG,

And then it’s saying that—if this is the way things are—how could you other people be saying that sprouts or the like arise through just such an essential nature?


[3001]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,RTEN CING ‘BREL BAR ‘BYUNG [f. 211b] BA GANG,
,DE NI STONG PA NYID DU BSHAD,
,DE NI RGYUR BYAS GDAGS PA STE,
,DE NI DBU MA’I LAM YIN NO,

Wisdom puts it this way:

Anything that occurs
Through dependence & connection
Is something we explain
As emptiness itself.

We speak of this
As being produced
Through causes;

And that is the path
Of the middle way.


[3002]
ZHES RTEN ‘BYUNG YIN PA NYID KYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PAR GSUNGS SHING,

What this is saying is that the very fact that something has occurred through dependence is enough to say that it is empty of existing through any nature of its own.


[3003]
MDO SDE LAS KYANG,
,GANG ZHIG RKYEN LAS SKYES PA DE MA SKYES,
,DE LA SKYE BA’I RANG BZHIN YOD LA {%MA} YIN,
,RKYEN LA RAG LAS GANG DE STONG PAR BSHAD,
,GANG ZHIG STONG NYID SHES DE BAG YOD YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The sutras also include the following lines:

Anything which has arisen
Through factors
Is something that never arose;

That would not be
Something that had
A nature of arising.

What we say is that
Anything which relies
Upon factors is empty;

Anyone who truly
Understands emptiness
Is a person who is
Truly aware.


[3004]
RKYEN LAS SKYES PA NI GTAN TSIGS SO,,

“Arisen through factors” is in fact the logical reason here.


[3005]
BSGRUB PAR BYA BA MA SKYES ZHES PA’I DON NI RKANG PA GNYIS PAS BSTAN TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES TE ZHES PA’I DON YIN GYI, DGAG BYA LA KHYAD PAR MA SBYAR BA MIN TE,

What the reason is proving is expressed in the words, “never arose”; and its meaning is expressed in the second line of the verse [in Tibetan, corresponding to the second section in the English translation], where it says “that would not be something that had a nature of arising.”  But it’s not as if there is no distinction in the wording for what it is we’re denying.


[3006]
LANG GSHEGS TSIG GSAL DU DRANGS PA LAS, BLO GROS CHEN PO RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA LA DGONGS NAS, NGAS CHOS THAMS CAD MA SKYES PA’O, ,ZHES BSTAN TE, ZHES SANGS RGYAS NYID KYIS RANG GI DGONGS PA RANG GIS BLANGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And that’s because we see the following reference to A Journey to Langka in A Clarification of the Verses:

Understand, my intelligent ones, that when I say that not one of all the things that exists ever arose, what I mean to say is that none of them has ever arisen through some nature of their own.

Which is to say, the Buddha himself is identifying what his true intent was, when he made certain statements.


[3007]
DE’I PHYIR RIGS PA’I RGYAL PO RTEN ‘BYUNG GI RIGS PA NYID KYIS, RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA ‘GOG PA ‘DI NYID BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS GSUNGS PAS THUGS PHROGS NAS,

And so it was that sages have seen their hearts stolen away by this very description by the Conqueror of how things arising through some nature of their own is to be denied, by employing the king of all reasoning: this logic of dependence we’ve described here.


[3008]
RTZA SHE DANG RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LA SOGS PA GZHUNG DU MAR, ‘PHAGS PAS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS LA RTEN ‘BYUNG GSUNG PA NYID KYI SGO NAS BSTOD PA MDZAD PA LA, BRTEN NAS SKYES PA NYID KYIS MA SKYES SO ZHES PA’I MUN SPRUL GANG CI YANG RUNG BA SHES RAB CAN GYIS SMRA BAR MI BYA’O,,

And so too is it that in many great classics such as Wisdom or The Sixty Verses, the Realized Being himself has sung the praises of the Conqueror for this very fact: that he spoke to us of how things occur in dependence.  And so too is it that those of you with intelligence should never devolve into some kind of total darkness and say things like “things cannot start, since they must start in dependence.”


[3009]
GANG GI TSE DE LTAR DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHAS MA BLANGS PA DE’I TSE RANG BZHIN MED PA NI BDAG GZHAN LAS SKYE BA LA SOGS PA GANG ZHIG TU ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR,

At the point where we refuse to accept that idea that things could exist through some nature of their own, then the general lack of a self-nature to things begins to refer to the fact that—for example—things might arise from themselves, or from something other than themselves.


[3010]
GAL TE RANG BZHIN GYIS [f. 212a] GRUB PA ‘GA’ ZHIG YOD NA NI DE’I TSE SKYE BA NGO BO NYID LAS SAM BDAG GZHAN DANG DBANG PHYUG SOGS LAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

If there did exist some kind of natural existence to things, then the arising of things could be something that happened in and of itself; or from itself or something other than itself; or from some supreme being—or something else of the like.


[3011]
SKYES ZIN PA MI ‘JIG PAR GNAS PAS RTAG PA DANG, ‘JIG PAS CHAD PA LA SOGS PAR RTOG PA ‘BYUNG BA SRID LA, DE LAS GZHAN DU NI MA YIN NO ZHES BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

And then it would be possible for people to entertain notions such as the one which says that things that had already arisen would remain, without ever stopping; and would thus be forever unchanging—or that they had long since been destroyed, and thus discontinued.  Otherwise though it would not be possible for such ideas to come up.  To express all this, we have the next verse of our root text.


	[3012]
[VI.116]
Syuḥ kalpanā vastuni vidyamāne
parīkṣitaṃ vastu yathā ca nāsti,
Vinendhanaṃ nāsti yathaiva vahnis
tadvad vinā vastu bhavanti naitāḥ.

,RTOG RNAMS DNGOS PO YOD NA ‘GYUR BA STE,
,DNGOS PO JI LTAR MED PAR YONGS DPYAD ZIN,
,DNGOS PO MED PAR ‘DI RNAMS MI ‘BYUNG DPER,
,BUD SHING MED PAR ME YOD MIN DE BZHIN,

		We have already examined,
		In depth, these notions
		That things could exist,

		And how things
		Could never be.

		In the absence
		Of things,
		These will never
		Come up;

		It’s like,
		For example,
		The way that

		Fire can never occur
		In the absence
Of firewood.


[3013]
MTHAR ‘DZIN PA’I RTOG PA RNAMS DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA YOD NA ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR BA STE, JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I RIGS PAS DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA JI LTAR YANG MED PAR YONGS SU DPYAD ZIN LA,

Suppose it happens that these notions that hold to the extremes come up, and they begin to hold that things could exist through some nature of their own.  We have already examined in depth—with the logic we covered—how any existence of things through this kind of nature is something that could never be.


[3014]
DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA MED PAR MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PA ‘DI RNAMS MI ‘BYUNG STE, DPER NA RGYU BUD SHING MED PAR ‘BRAS BU ME YOD PA MIN PA DE BZHIN NO,,

In the absence though of the habit of holding that things could exist through some nature of their own, these kinds of notions will never come up; it’s like, for example, the way that the result of fire can never occur in the absence of its cause: the firewood.


[3015]
DE LTAR NA DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON GTAN LA PHAB PA GOMS PA LAS, RNAL ‘BYOR PA ‘PHAGS PA’I LAM MNGON SUM DU MDZAD PA’I MNYAM GZHAG GIS SNANG BA’I SPROS PA MA GZIGS PA’I TSUL GYIS DE KHO NA NYID GZIGS PA DE DAG LA CHOS GANG LA YANG BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA’I RTOG PA THOG MA MED PA NAS GOMS PA RNAMS LDOG PAR ‘GYUR TE,

And so it is that when they have accustomed ourselves to establishing just what it is that suchness refers to, the deep practitioner is able to go into a balanced meditation where they can manifest—directly—the path of a realized being.  And then this meditation helps them to see suchness, in the manner of not seeing the various ways that things might appear to one as false elaborations.  Thus then are such people able to put a stop to any habit of the kind that we have possessed for time with no beginning, of a notion where they feel strongly attached to the idea that any object at all could exist in truth.


[3016]
DPER NA MIG SMAN BSKUS PAS SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PAR SNANG BA LOG PA NYID RAB RIB CAN LA ‘BRAS BUR ‘GYUR GYI, SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA RANG BZHIN GZHAN ZHIG TU SONG BA’I SGO NAS DE’I YUL DU ‘GYUR BA MIN PA BZHIN NO,,

It’s like, for example, when we apply some medicinal drops to our eyes, and this puts a complete stop to the appearance of any strand of hair or the like; this is the kind of result that comes to the person who was afflicted with the cataracts.  It is not the case though that some strand of hair or the like has transformed into having some other sort of nature, and then can no longer serve as the object of our perceptions.



Fruits from the examination

[3017]
BZHI PA NI,

Next comes our fourth part from before: identifying the fruits we derive from having undertaken this logical examination.


	[3018]
[VI.117]
Yā kalpanānāṃ vinivṛttir etat
phalaṃ vicārasya budhā vadanti,
Pṛthagjanāḥ kalpanayaiva baddhā
akalpayan muktim upaiti yogi.

,SO SO’I SKYE BO RNAMS NI RTOG PAS BCINGS,
,MI RTOG RNAL ‘BYOR PA NI GROL ‘GYUR BAS,
,RTOG RNAMS LOG PAR GYUR PA GANG YIN DE,
,RNAM PAR DPYOD PA’I ‘BRAS BUR MKHAS RNAMS GSUNG,

		Common beings
		Are enslaved by notions;

		Deep practitioners
		Do not imagine things,
		And become liberated.

		The wise
Have presented this:

The results of
Correct analysis,
Turning away
From those notions.		


[3019]
GANG GI PHYIR SO SO’I SKYE BO CHOS NYID ‘DI SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR MI SHES PA RNAMS NI GTZO BOR MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PAS BCINGS PA DE’I PHYIR CHOS NYID ‘DI [f. 212b] DE LTAR THUGS SU CHUD PAS PHYIN CI LOG TU RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA NA RNAL ‘BYOR PA ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS NI GROL BAR ‘GYUR BAS

Common beings, as we have noted before, fail to understand this way of all things; which is to say, they are for the most part enslaved by notions where they hold to extremes.  As such, deep practitioners—which is to say, realized beings—do not imagine things to exist in any wrong way, for they have gained a complete grasp of that way of things.  And in this way, they become liberated.


[3020]
DE’I PHYIR MTHAR ‘DZIN PA’I RTOG PA RNAMS KYI ‘DZIN STANGS KYI YUL MA LUS PA BKAG PAS RTOG PA LOG PAR GYUR PA GANG YIN PA DE NYID ‘PHAGS PAS DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LAS BSHAD PA’I RNAM PAR DPYOD PA’I ‘BRAS BUR RNAM PAR BZHAG GO ZHES MKHAS PA RNAMS GSUNG NGO,,

And so it is that the wise have presented the following description; which is to say, this one thing has been explained, by the Realized One, in his classical commentary to the middle way.  And this is a description of the results of correct analysis: turning away from those notions, and putting this end to all the objects that notions which hold to the extremes grasp onto.


[3021]
BRGYA PA LAS KYANG,
,DNGOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD NA,
,STONG MTHONG YON TAN CI ZHIG YOD,
,RTOG PAS MTHONG BA ‘CHING BA STE,
,DE NYID ‘DIR NI ‘GOG PA YIN,

As the 400 Verses puts it,

	If things did exist
	Through some nature
	Of their own,

	Then what good
	Would it ever be
	To see emptiness?

	Those who see
	With their conceptions
	Are enslaved;

	And that’s exactly
	What we here deny.


[3022]
ZHES CHOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD NA DE NYID GSHIS YIN PAS DE MTHONG BA MDZES KYI, RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG PA MTHONG BA LA YON TAN MED DO,,

What this is saying is that—if things did exist through some nature of their own—then that would be the way things are.  And then it would be a beautiful thing to see this; and there would be no great benefit to seeing that things were empty of any self-nature.


[3023]
DE’I PHYIR RTOG PAS MTHONG BA STE, RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR BZUNG BAS ‘CHING BA YIN PAS, DE’I ZHEN YUL DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS ‘DIR DGAG PAR BYA BA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS LA,

As such then, a person who sees things with these notions in mind is holding that things exist through some nature of their own; and are enslaved by this view.  And the object that they hold to exist is what it is we are denying here in our classical commentary upon the middle way.


[3024]
DE’I ‘GREL PA LAS KYANG RTOG PA NI YANG DAG PA MA YIN PA’I RANG BZHIN GYI DON SGRO ‘DOGS PA STE, ZHES YANG DAG PAR YOD PA MA YIN PA LA YANG DAG TU YOD PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PA LA BSHAD PAS, RTOG PA GANG YIN THAMS CAD LA MI BYED KYI BDEN ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PA DANG MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PA LA BYED DO,,

In the commentary to this we further see this notion described as “an overestimation of reality involving a nature which is flawed.”  Which is to say, it is being described as the overestimation of something which does not exist purely as existing purely.  As such this is not a blanket reference to all forms of mistaken notions, but rather referring to the notion where one believes that things exist in truth; or else a notion where one is holding to extreme viewpoints.


[3025]
MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PA YANG MTHA’I SGRA DON MANG PO LA ‘JUG KYANG MTHA’ BRAL GYI MTHA’ NI DBU MA SNANG BA LAS, 

Now as far as these “notions where one is holding to extreme viewpoints,” the word “extreme” can in general refer to a lot of different things.  As for the use of “extreme” in the expression “free of extremes,” we can follow the following description from Light on the Middle Way.


[3026]
GAL TE DBU MA LA SEMS KYI RANG GI NGO BO’I BDAG NYID KYI DNGOS PO DON DAM PA CI YANG RUNG BA ZHIG YOD PAR GYUR NA NI, DE’I TSE DE LA YOD PAS RTAG GO ZHE’AM, MI RTAG GO ZHES BYA BAR MNGON PAR [f. 213a] ZHEN PA YANG JI LTAR MTHAR ‘GYUR TE, DNGOS PO’I DE KHO NA NYID JI LTA BA BZHIN GYI RJES SU SONG ZHING TSUL BZHIN YID LA BYED PA NYID NI, LTUNG BA’I GNAS SO ZHES BYA BAR RIGS PA MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA BZHIN NO,,

If it were the case that in the middle way there could ever be some kind of ultimately existing entity with some essential nature of its own, then at that point there could exist with that the deluded belief that “this is unchanging,” or “this is changing”; which is to say, there would be a way of holding to an extreme.  That is, if a person has reached a place where they see the suchness of entities just as it really is, and if they are thinking of that in a perfectly correct manner, then it would never be appropriate to say of them, “They are at a place where they could fall.”


[3027]
DE YANG JI LTAR BZUNG BA DE LTAR YOD PA’I YUL DE NI ‘DIR MTHA’ MIN LA, BLO YANG TSUL BZHIN YID BYED YIN PAS MTHAR ‘DZIN MIN NO,,

That is, an object which does exist exactly in the way that we hold it to is something that we would not call an extreme.  And since the corresponding state of mind would be focusing upon its object in a correct way, it could never be described as “holding to an extreme.”


[3028]
DES NA ‘DI’I MTHA’ NI LTUNG BA’I GNAS YIN TE, ‘JIG RTEN NA BRAG G-YANG LA MTHA’ DANG DE LA LHUNG BA LA MTHA’ LA LTUNG ZHES SMRA BA LTAR, GANG DU GZUNG BAS ‘DZIN PA PO PHUNG BAR ‘GYUR BA LA MTHAR LHUNG ZHES BSHAD PA’O,,

As such, when we refer to an “extreme” here, we are talking about a place from which you could take a fall.  In the everyday world, for example, they talk about a cliff on a mountain as being the “extreme limit”; and when a person falls off of a cliff like this people say “they went over the edge.”  Here we are talking about the same thing: we’re referring to a position that—when you hold to it—you are completely lost: you have “fallen off the very edge of the cliff.”


[3029]
DE LA YANG DAG PAR YOD PA THA SNYAD DU YANG MI SRID PAS YANG DAG PAR MED PA THA SNYAD DU YOD PA’I PHYIR, DON DAM PAR MED CES PA MED PA’I MTHAR ‘DZIN DANG,

For something to exist in some absolutely pure sense in the context we’re speaking about here is in fact an impossibility, even nominally speaking; and so we can say that—speaking nominally—things do not exist purely.  To say then that things failed to exist, but in a pure sense, would again to be holding to an extreme.


[3030]
DE LTAR MA YIN ZHES ‘GOG PA MED MTHA’ ‘GOG PA MIN KYANG, DGAG BYA BKAG PA’I MED PA YANG DAG PAR YOD DO ZHES ‘DZIN NA DNGOS PO MED PA’I MTHAR LTUNG BAS DE ‘GOG PA YANG MED MTHA’ ‘GOG PA YIN NO,,

Now making a denial here and saying that this is not the way things are does not constitute a denial of the extreme notion of saying that nothing can exist.  But one would have fallen into the extreme of saying that no entity could exist, if they were to hold that the absence remaining once we have blocked the object that we deny did have some pure existence.  And so we can say that denying that idea does constitute the denial of the notion that things could never exist.


[3031]
LAS ‘BRAS LA SOGS PA’I CHOS RNAMS THA SNYAD DU YOD PA LA TSAD MA SUS KYANG GNOD MI SRID PAR, DE DAG YOD PA MIN PA’AM MED PAR ‘DZIN PA’I YUL YUL CAN NI MED MTHA’ DANG DE’I MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI, SANGS RGYAS LA SKYON MED CES PA LTA BU RNAMS MED MTHA’ DANG DE’I MTHAR ‘DZIN MIN NO,,

The fact that things like karma and its consequences do exist in a nominal sense is something that is impossible to question with any example of accurate perception.  The object and the subject holding to such entities and saying either that they are not existing things, or that they are non-existent, constitute the extreme of not existing at all, and the holding to that extreme.  We could never speak though—of the extreme notion of things not existing, or holding to this extreme—using something like the wording for “flaws do not exist” which we employ when we refer to an Enlightened Being.


[3032]
‘DI NI SKUR ‘DEBS KYI MED MTHA’ YIN LA SNGA MA NI SGRO ‘DOGS KYI MED MTHA’ ‘O,,

This by the way is the extreme notion of things not existing in the form of discounting what is actually there; whereas the earlier case represents the same extreme notion in the form of an overestimation of things.


[3033]
DE’I PHYIR SNGAR BSHAD PA’I BKAG PA LAS MA GTOGS PA’I CHOS RNAMS NI, DON DAM PAR RAM RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS YOD PAR ‘DZIN PA’I YUL YUL CAN NI [f. 213b] YOD MTHA’ DANG DE’I MTHAR ‘DZIN YIN GYI, SANGS RGYAS LA MKHYEN BRTZE YOD CES PA LTA BU RNAMS YOD MTHA’ DANG DE’I MTHAR ‘DZIN MIN NO,,

As such, let us consider those objects that would be excepted from the denial that we have earlier expressed here.  The object involved, and the subject involved, when we hold that these things could exist ultimately, or by definition, are what we are referring to when we speak of the extreme notion that things do exist, or to holding to this particular extreme.  It is not though that saying things like “an Enlightened Being does possess knowledge & love” would represent this extreme notion that things exist, or cleaving to that extreme.


[3034]
GZHUNG GI SKABS ‘GA’ ZHIG TU DON DAM PAR YOD PA THAMS CAD YOD MTHAR BSHAD PA YANG YOD DO,,

We do also see, in selected passages of the text, the totality of things that exist ultimately refered to as “the extreme of existence.”


	[3035]
[VI.118]
Na vādalobhād vihito vicāras
tattvaṃ tu śāstre kathitaṃ vimuktyai,
Vyākhyāyamāne yadi nāma tattve
bhidāṃ gatānyanyamatānyadoṣaḥ.

,BSTAN BCOS LAS DPYAD RTZOD LA CHAGS PA’I PHYIR,
,MA MDZAD RNAM GROL PHYIR NI DE NYID BSTAN,
,GAL TE DE NYID RNAM PAR BSHAD PA NA,
,GZHAN GZHUNG ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR NA NYES PA MED,

		Logical arguments
		In the classical commentary
		Were not made

		Out of a love for
		Disputation.

		They were for teaching
		The concept of suchness,
		For the purpose
		Of liberating beings.

		Suppose it is the case
		That, when we undertake
		To present the details
		Of our explanations
		Of suchness,

		The texts of other
		Groups are shattered.
		You cannot fault us
		For that.


[3036]
DE NYID KYI PHYIR ‘PHAGS PAS DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LAS, RIGS PA’I RNAM PAR DPYAD PA SHIN TU MANG BAR MDZAD PA NI, RTZOD PA LA CHAGS PA STE GZHAN ZIL GYIS GNON PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR MA MDZAD DO ZHES SHES PAR BYA STE,

For this very reason, one should understand something about how the Realized One employs a vast number of different logical arguments in his classical commentary upon the middle way.  Which is to say, it is not at all that he made them out of a love for disputation—to somehow put down others.


[3037]
RIGS PA’I RNAM PAR DPYAD PA MDZAD PA NA, DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LAS DE KHO NA NYID BSTAN PA NI, SEMS CAN GYIS DE KHO NA NYID ‘DI LTA BU PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR RTOGS NAS, THAR PA THOB PAR GYUR NA CI MA RUNG ZHES SKYE BO RNAMS RNAM PAR GROL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR NI MDZAD PA YIN NO,,

When he does undertake these different forms of logical analyses, and uses them in his commentary on the middle way to teach the concept of suchness, what he’s saying is “How wonderful it would be if living beings could come to realize this kind of suchness, with complete accuracy, and thus attain freedom!”  That is, he follows this methodology of reasoning all for the purpose of liberating living beings.


[3038]
GAL TE KHYOD KYIS DNGOS POR SMRA BA RNAMS KYI RGOL BA JI LTAR BRTAGS PA THAMS CAD BKOD CING BSTAN BCOS LAS BKAG PA MA YIN NAM, DE’I PHYIR BSTAN BCOS KYI ‘JUG PA NI RTZOD PA’I PHYIR YIN PAS, RTOG PA LDOG PA TZAM ZHIG KHO NA ‘BRAS BUR JI LTAR RNAM PAR BZHAG CE NA,

One may then come with the following question—

But isn’t the case that in your commentary you have set forth all the fabricated arguments of your opponents—those who believe that functional things have some self-existence—and then set about denying their correctness?  So isn’t it in fact the case that the very methodology of your commentary is argumentation, and is not the result of that argumentation simply to stop some made-up ideas?  What kind of useful result then could come out of that?


[3039]
RNAM PAR DPYAD PA ‘DI NI RTZOD PA’I PHYIR MDZAD PA MA YIN MOD KYI, ‘ON KYANG DE KHO NA NYID NYE BAR BSTAN PA NA, GZHAN PHYOGS RANG BZHIN GYIS STOBS CHUNG BAS GZHAN GYI GZHUNG LUGS RNAMS BDAG NYID ‘THEN MI ‘DZUGS SHING, 

Our logical explorations, admittedly, were not done with the intention of simple argumentation.  Rather, the fact is that, when we are on the topic of trying to explain suchness, the opponents involved are of relatively low capacity—and therefore prove incapable, themselves, of bringing out the main points of the opposing schools involved.


[3040]
SNANG BA NYE BA NA MUN PA LTAR RANG NYID ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR BA DES NA KHO BO CAG LA SKYON MED PA NYID DO ZHES BSHAD PA,

Which is to say, when dawn is close to breaking, the darkness rushes to destroy itself; as such, you cannot fault us.  To express these thoughts, we see the next lines of our root text here.


[3041]
GAL TE DE KHO NA NYID RNAM PAR BSHAD PA NA GZHAN GYI GZHUNG GIS BTAGS PA RNAMS ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR NA KHO BO CAG LA NYES PA MED DE,

Suppose then that it is the case that—when we undertake to present the details of our explanations of suchness—the fabricated arguments found in the texts of other groups are shattered.  But you cannot fault us for that.


[3042]
BRGYA [f. 214a] BA LAS,
,CHOS ‘DI DE BZHIN GSHEGS RNAMS KYIS,
,RTZOD PA MDZAD PHYIR GSUNGS MA YIN,
,’ON KYANG ME YIS BUD SHING LTAR,
,’DI YIS PHAS KYI RGOL BA SREG

As the 400 Verses puts it,

	The teachings were never
	Granted by Those Gone Thus
	So that they could engage
	In simple disputation.

	But yes they did indeed
	Incinerate their opponents,
	Just because that is what
	Fire tends to do with wood.


[3043]
,CES ME BUS PA BTUNG BA BSKOL BA’I PHYIR DU BYAS KYI THAL BA DANG SOL BA’I PHYIR DU BYAS PA MIN KYANG, DE DAG KYANG ZHAR LA ‘BYUNG BA’I DPES GSUNGS SO,,

That is, when we make efforts to stoke a fire, it’s not that we’re hoping we can get more dust and ashes.  But that does tend to happen, as a side-effect of our exertions.  This is what the metaphor here is expressing.


[3044]
GAL TE RTZOD PA LA CHAGS PA’I PHYIR CHOS NYE BAR BSTAN NA NI, DE’I TSE THE TSOM MED PAR GZHAN GYI PHYOGS SKYON DANG LDAN PA LA SDANG ZHING RIGS PA DANG LDAN PA’I RANG GI PHYOGS LA RJES SU CHAGS PAR ‘GYUR BAS, KHRO CHAGS KYI RTOG PA LDOG PA MED DO,,

Suppose the reason that one grants these teachings is all out of some attachment to argumentation.  In this case, it’s beyond any doubt that we would start to feel aversion for the positions of the other side, defective as these positions are.  And then equally we would start to feel attachment to our own side, logical as it is.  And in this case, those wrong emotions of anger and attachment would become themselves unbeatable.


	[3045]
[VI.119]
Svadṛṣṭirāgo’pi hi kalpanaiva
tathānya dṛṣṭāvapi yaś ca roṣaḥ,
Vidhūya rāgaṃ pratighaṃ ca tasmād
vicārayan kṣipram upaiti muktim.

,RANG GI LTA LA CHAGS DANG DE BZHIN DU,
,GZHAN GYI LTA LA ‘KHRUG GANG RTOG PA NYID,
,DE PHYIR ‘DOD CHAGS KHONG KHRO RNAM BSAL TE,
,RNAM DPYOD PA NI MYUR DU GROL BAR ‘GYUR,

	When we have attachment
	To our own viewpoints,
	And when—
	In the same way—
	
	We feel disturbed
	By views, we are
	Falling into those
	Very notions.

	In this case,
	We will be able
	To clear away

	Those tendencies
	To feel attachment
	And aversion—

	When we are able
	To analyze things,
	We find ourselves
	Liberated, with speed.


[3046]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, ‘DI LTAR RANG GI LTA BA LA CHAGS PA DANG DE BZHIN DU GZHAN PHYOGS KYI LTA BA LA RGYUD ‘KHRUG PA GANG YIN PA DE NI, ‘CHING BA’I RTOG PA NYID YIN PAS KHRO CHAGS KYI RTOG PA MA LOG PAR ‘PHEL BAS BCINGS PA NYID DU ‘GYUR GYI THAR PA NI MIN NO,,

And why is that?  When we have attachment like this to our own viewpoints, and when—in the same way—our hearts feel disturbed by the views of other parties, we are falling into the very notions that enslave people.  And then rather than turning away from these useless ideas of anger and attachment, these instead increase within us.  And then they lead us to that same old enslavement—and there is no freedom for us.


[3047]
GANG GI TSE CHOS ‘DI RTZOD PA’I PHYIR DU BSTAN PA MA YIN PA DE’I TSE, DE’I PHYIR RANG PHYOGS LA ‘DOD CHAGS DANG, GZHAN PHYOGS LA KHONG KHRO BA RNAM PAR BSAL TE, RIGS PAS RNAM PAR DPYOD PA NI MYUR DU GROL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Suppose then that we are able to avoid the tendency of granting the teachings out of some desire to argue with others.  In this case, we will be able to clear away those tendencies to feel attachment to our own positions, and aversion towards those of others.  That is, when we are able to analyze things with clear thinking, we find ourselves liberated, with speed.


[3048]
RIGS PA DRUG CU PA LAS KYANG,
,RTZOD MED CHE BA’I BDAG NYID CAN,
,DE DAG LA NI PHYOGS MED DO,
,GANG RNAMS LA NI PHYOGS MED PA,
,DE LA GZHAN PHYOGS GA LA YOD,
CES DANG,

As the Sixty Verses on the Logic of Emptiness puts it,

Those who are great beings
Take no position,
And never engage in dispute.

How could there be
Some other position,
For those who have
 	No position themselves?


[3049]
BRGYA PA LAS KYANG,
,RANG GI PHYOGS LA CHAGS YOD CING,
,GZHAN PHYOGS LA KHYOD MI DGA’ NA,
,MYA NGAN ‘DAS PAR MI ‘GRO STE,
,GNYIS SPYOD ZHI BAR YOD MI ‘GYUR,
ZHES DANG,

The 400 Verses says as well,

	When you have attachment
	To your own position,
	And feel unhappy
	With the positions of others,

	You will never travel
	To nirvana.

	There is no peace
	For those who live
	In division.


[3050]
TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI RGYAL PO LAS KYANG,
,GANG ZHIG CHOS ‘DI THOS NAS CHAGS [f. 214b] BYED CING,
,CHOS MA YIN PA THOS NAS KHONG KHRO BYED,
,NGA RGYAL RGYAGS PAS BCOM PA LOG PA STE,
,NGA RGYAL DBANG GIS SDUG BSNGAL RJES SU MYONG,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The King of Concentration too says—

	Anyone who hears these teachings
	And becomes attached to them;

	Anyone who hears mistaken teachings
	And feels anger over them

	Goes wrong, for they are beaten
	By pride, and arrogance.

	And because of their pride,
	They will live in pain.


[3051]
BDAG GZHAN GYI PHYOGS LA CHAGS PA DANG KHRO BA’I PHYOGS LHUNG DOR NAS GZU BO’I BLOS MA DPYAD NA, GRUB MTHA’ LA DPYOD PAR SGOM PA DE NYID LA BRTEN NAS ‘KHOR BAR DAM DU ‘CHING BAR GSUNGS PA ‘DI NYID, BDAG CAG RNAMS LA THUGS BRTZE BAS MAN NGAG KHYAD PAR CAN BYIN PAR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG

Suppose we are unable to let go of this kind of prejudice, of attachment and hatred towards the positions we ourselves hold, and those of others—we are unable to think out things with an unbiased state of mind.  What this very citation is saying is that—when we accustom ourselves to just this kind of analysis of the various schools of thought—it will chain us ever more tightly to the circle of pain.  And so all of us should understand that we have thus been granted some very special words of advice, from a person who really loves us.


[3052]
,BDAG SKYE ‘GOG PA NAS ‘DI YAN CHAD KYIS CHOS KYI BDAG MED BSTAN PAR GSUNGS TE, DNGOS PO’I CHOS KYI BDAG MED BSTAN PA NI SHIN TU MANG LA, DNGOS MED KYI CHOS KYI BDAG MED KYANG BAR BAR DU BSTAN PA LA DGONGS SO,,

It’s been said that—now that we’ve denied the idea that things could arise from themselves—from this point on in the text what’s being presented is the lack of any self-existence to things.  The thinking here is that there are a great many presentations of how things that are functional have no nature of their own; but it is only from time to time that we see explanations of how existing entities with no function lack any such nature.



Freedom requires understanding the self

[3053]
GNYIS PA GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA LA GSUM, THAR ‘DOD KYIS THOG MAR BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NYID DGAG DGOS PAR BSTAN PA, BDAG DANG BDAG GI BA GNYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA’I TSUL, BDAG DANG SHING RTA’I DPYAD PA DNGOS PO GZHAN LA YANG BSGRE BAR BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

With this we have reached our second major part from above, on using reasoning to prove that the person has no self-nature.  This itself we will cover in three sections: (1) showing how those who wish to achieve freedom need, before anything else, to deny that the self is something that could exist through any nature of its own; (2) how it is that we deny the idea that either me or mine could exist through any nature of their own; and (3) the way in which we can apply our examination of the self, and of a wagon, to other entities as well.  Here is the first.


	[3054]
[VI.120]
Satkāyadṛṣṭi prabhavān aśeṣān
kleśāṃś ca doṣāṃś ca dhiyā vipaśyan,
Ātmānam asyā viṣayaṃ ca buddhvā
yogī karotyātmaniṣedham eva.

,NYON MONGS SKYON RNAMS MA LUS ‘JIG TSOGS LA,
,LTA LAS BYUNG BAR BLO YIS MTHONG GYUR ZHING,
,BDAG NI ‘DI YI YUL DU RTOGS BYAS NAS,
,RNAL ‘BYOR PA YIS BDAG NI ‘GOG PAR BYED,

		Our intellect
		Comes to see

		That each & every
		One of the troubles
		Of the negative emotions

		Comes from
		The view of destruction.

		What we come to realize
		Is that what this
Thinks it sees
Is the self;

And then the
Deep practitioner
Works to stop
The self.
		

[3055]
DE LTAR LUNG DANG RIGS PAS CHOS KYI BDAG MED BSTAN NAS, DE’I ‘OG TU GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Having thus made our presentation—utilizing both scripture and logic—of the way in which entities have no self-nature, we turn now to an explanation meant to show how there is no self-nature to the person.


[3056]
‘DI NA RNAL ‘BYOR PA DE KHO NA NYID LA ‘JUG PAR ‘DOD CING NYON MONGS PA’I SKYON MA LUS PA SPONG BAR ‘DOD PA NI, ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHYAM PA ‘DI CI ‘DRA BA ZHIG GI RTZA BA CAN YIN SNYAM DU RTOG PAR BYED LA,

On this point, we have some advice for those deep practitioners who wish to engage in subject of suchness; and who seek to eliminate each & every one of the problems relating to the negative emotions.  They should be wondering just what serves as the very root behind the way we all wander in the circle of suffering.


[3057]
DE LTAR BRTAGS PA NA NYON MONGS PA NI ‘DOD CHAGS LA SOGS PA DANG, SKYON RNAMS NI SKYE RGA NA ‘CHI LA SOGS PA STE [f. 215a] DE RNAMS MA LUS PAR NGA DANG NGA’I ‘O SNYAM PA’I RNAM PA CAN DE GNYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I SHES RAB NYON MONGS PA CAN GYI ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA LAS BYUNG BAR BLO YIS MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR TE, DE DAG NI MA LUS PAR ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA’I ‘BRAS BU YIN NO,,

And when we examine this question, our intellect comes to see where it is that everything related to negative emotions—ignorant desire and the like—as well as all the rest of our problems (birth, aging, death, and so on) really comes from.  And the fact is that each & every one of these troubles comes the view of destruction, which is a kind of negative intelligence where we have thoughts about “me” and “mine” and hold these two to exist through some nature of their own.  That is, each and every one of those pains is a result of the view of destruction.


[3058]
DE LTAR MTHONG BA NA ‘JIG LTA SPONG BAR ‘DOD PA ‘BYUNG LA, DE’I TSE SHES RAB CAN ZHIG YIN NA NI DE SPONG BA DE YANG SNGAR CHOS DBYINGS BSTOD PA DANG BZHI BRGYA PA’I LUNG DRANGS PA LTAR ‘JIG LTAS JI LTAR BZUNG BA LTAR GYI BDAG YUL STENG NA MED PAR MTHONG BAS SPONG DGOS PAR MTHONG NAS,

When we do see this fact, then we start to feel a desire to eliminate this view of destruction.  At this point, if someone is a person of intelligence, they see what it is that they have to give up to accomplish this.  That is, they will follow the lines that we have cited previously from The Praise of the Realm of Reality and The 400 Verses, and come to recognize that the kind of self-nature which our perishable view holds to exist does not in the least apply to the objects of the world.


[3059]
‘JIG LTAS GZHI GANG LA ZHEN PA ‘DI’I DMIGS PA GANG YIN SNYAM DU BRTAGS PA NA, BDAG STE NGA ZHES PA’I NGA NI BDAG TU LTA BA ‘DI’I YUL DMIGS PA’O SNYAM DU RTOGS TE, NGAR ‘DZIN PA NI BDAG GI YUL CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

One may wonder then just what kind of aspect it is that the view of destruction assumes, when it begins to hold its beliefs about any particular object.  And what we come to realize is that what this view thinks it sees is what we have called “the self”—which is to say, a certain kind of “me.”  It is the “me” which the view of some self thinks it is focused upon.  And that is because the tendency to hold to “me” takes, as its object, a “self.”


[3060]
DE’I TSE NYES SKYON MA LUS PA SPONG BAR ‘DOD PAS RTZA BA ‘JIG LTA NYID SPANG BAR BYA BA YIN LA,

At this point, what we hope to do is to eliminate each & every problem there is: each and every fault.  Thus it is then that what we will have to eliminate is none other than this view of destruction.


[3061]
DE YANG DE’I DMIGS PA BDAG GI BDAG STE NGO BOS GRUB PA MED PAR KHONG DU CHUD PA LAS SPONG BAR ‘GYUR BAS, RNAL ‘BYOR PAS GANG ZHIG BDAG TU ‘DZIN PA’I YUL BDAG CES BYA BA ‘DI, NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB MA GRUB CI ‘DRA BA ZHIG CES THOG MAR BDAG KHO NA LA RTOG PAR BYED DO,,

This in itself is something that we have to eliminate by coming to a realization that my “me”—the object that this view focuses upon—has nothing about it which could exist through some essential nature of its own.  And so it is that that the deep practitioner is going to have to decide—at the beginning, only with regard to themselves—the question of whether this “self” that the tendency to hold to a self grasps on to is something that could exist though some essential nature of its own, or not.


[3062]
RNAL ‘BYOR PA YIS BDAG DE NI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PAR BYED PA LAS, ‘JIG LTA SPANGS NA NYES SKYON KUN LDOG PAS NA, BDAG LA RNAM PAR DPYAD PA ‘DI NI THAR PA SGRUB PA’I THABS YIN TE,

The way it goes is that the deep practitioner works to stop the idea that the self is something that could exist through some nature of its own; this then eliminates the view of destruction, which in turn puts a stop to all the problems there ever were.  As such, the examination of whether a self exists or not is itself the method for attaining freedom.


[3063]
BSLAB BTUS LAS, GANG ZAG STONG PA NYID NI DE LTAR SHIN TU GRUB PA YIN NA, ,DE’I PHYIR RTZA BA CHAD PAS [f. 215b] NYON MONGS PA THAMS CAD KUN TU MI ‘BYUNG NGO,,

As the Compendium of All the Trainings puts it,

Suppose that a person is able to prove, beyond the shadow of a doubt, the emptiness of the person.  This has the effect of stopping each and everyone one of the negative emotions, completely—because it severs their very root.


[3064]
‘PHAGS PA DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I GSANG BA’I MDO LAS JI SKAD DU, ZHI BA’I BLO GROS ‘DI LTA STE DPER NA, SHING RTZA BA NAS BCAD NA YAL GA DANG LO MA DANG YAL GA PHRA MO THAMS CAD SKAM PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As the exalted Sutra of the Secret of Those Gone Thus puts it,

O Peaceful Intellect, this is the way it is.  If—to take an example—you cut a tree from its roots, then the branches, the leaves, and the twigs all dry up on their own.


[3065]
ZHI BA’I BLO GROS DE BZHIN DU ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA NYE BAR ZHI NA, NYON MONGS PA DANG NYE BA’I NYON MONGS PA THAMS CAD ZHI BAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

Here, o Peaceful Intellect, it is the same.  It’s similar to the way it’s been stated that—if you are able to put a final stop to the view of destruction—then everything to do with the negative emotions, and the secondary negative emotions, comes to a stop as well.


[3066]
‘DI LTAR GSUNGS PA LA MKHAS PA’I DBANG PO RNAMS DGONGS PA MTHUN PAS, THOG MAR ‘KHOR BA’I NYES DMIGS LEGS PAR SHES NAS SEMS PA DANG, 

The lords of the wise are of one mind regarding these kinds of statements.  That is, we start off by learning, thoroughly, all the various problems with this circle of pain—and then we think about them.


[3067]
DE NAS DE’I RTZA BA GANG YIN NGOS ‘DZIN PA DANG, DE NAS DE SPONG BAR ‘DOD PA NA SPONG THABS KYI THAD DU MA ‘PHYUGS PAR DE’I ZHEN YUL BKAG PA’I BDAG MED KYI LTA BA ZHIG NGES PAR RNYED NAS,

With this, we come to identify just what it is that serves as the very root of this circle.  If then we hope to eliminate this root, then we have to be sure that we make no errors regarding the proper methodology of doing so.  Which is to say, we will beyond any doubt have to ascertain that view of no-self which we can use to put a stop to the object that we think we see here: we will have to identify, with certainty, a correct view of how no self exists.


[3068]
DE’I DON LA ‘DRIS PAR BYED PA NI, THEG PA CHE CHUNG GANG LA YANG DGOS PA SHES PAR BYA’O,,

After that, we must accustom ourselves to what this view involves.  One should understand that all this is a necessity—whether we’re talking about the greater way, or the lesser way.


[3069]
GAL TE RIN CHEN ‘PHRENG BA LAS,
,JI SRID PHUNG POR ‘DZIN YOD PA,
,DE SRID DE LA NGAR ‘DZIN YOD,
,NGAR ‘DZIN YOD NA YANG LAS TE,
,LAS LAS KYANG NI SKYE BA YIN,

One may ask then about the following lines from the String of Precious Jewels—

	As long as we grasp to
	The parts of the person,
	Then we will continue
	To hold to a “me.”

	As long as we hold
	To a “me,” then
	There will be karma;
	And rebirth comes
	From karma.


[3070]
ZHES PHUNG PO BDEN ‘DZIN CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BAR BSHAD LA, ‘DIR ‘JIG LTA ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BAR BSHAD PA GNYIS ‘GAL TE, ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BA MI MTHUN PA GNYIS MI ‘THAD PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

“What this is saying,” you might begin, “is that holding that the parts to a person are real is the tendency to grasp to some self-nature of things which we are taught is the very root of the cycle of pain.  But that would contradict the explanation that the view of destruction is the root of this same cycle.  It seems to me that it would be incorrect to say that there were two different roots of the cycle of pain that were incompatible with each other.”


[3071]
SKYON MED DE ‘DI PA’I LUGS KYIS BDAG ‘DZIN GNYIS DMIGS PAS SO SOR ‘BYED KYI, ‘DZIN STANGS KYI RNAM PA MI ‘DRA BA MED DE,

And yet there is no such problem.  According to those who follow this system, the two forms of grasping to some self-nature are distinguished from one another by the object upon which they focus; it is not though the case that there is any difference between the two in the manner in which they hold their object.


[3072]
GNYIS KA YANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I RNAM PA CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BA GNYIS ‘GAL BA NA YUL LA [f. 216a] ‘JUG PA’I ‘DZIN STANGS MI MTHUN PA GNYIS ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BAR ‘JOG PA LA BYED PA’I PHYIR,,

And that’s because both of them display an aspect where they hold their object to exist through some nature of its own.  And if the two roots of the circle of pain were to contradict each other, then one would have to establish the root of this cycle as consisting of two manners of engaging in an object which were internally inconsistent with each other.


[3073]
DES NA CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN ‘JIG LTA’I RGYUR STON PA NA, MA RIG PA’I NANG TSAN GNYIS RGYU ‘BRAS SU STON ZHING, DE GNYIS KA NYON MONGS KYI RTZA BAR STON PA NA RANG DANG ‘DZIN STANGS MI MTHUN PA’I NYON MONGS GZHAN THAMS CAD KYI RTZA BAR STON PA YIN LA, TSUL DE YANG DE GNYIS KA LA YOD PAS MI ‘GAL TE, MA RIG PA’I RIGS ‘DRA SNGA PHYI GNYIS KA ‘KHOR BA’I RTZA BAR MI ‘GAL BA BZHIN NO,,

As such, when what you teach says that the tendency to hold to some self-nature to things is the cause of the view of destruction, what you’re saying is that two variations of misunderstanding are acting as cause & effect.  When you say that both of these are roots for negative emotions, then what you are saying is that they are roots of each and every other negative emotion which holds things in a manner which is inconsistent with the way that they do.  It would not be a contradiction for this way of things to apply to both, for it similar to the way in which earlier and later manifestations of misunderstanding can both represent the root of the circle of pain, without there being any contradiction.



The system of the Numerists

[3074]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DGAG PA DANG, BDAG GI BA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DGAG PA’O,,

Which brings us to our second section from above: how it is that we deny the idea that either me or mine could exist through any nature of their own.  We proceed in two steps: denying that the self could exist through any nature of its own; and then denying that what belongs to the self could exist through any nature of its own.


[3075]
DANG PO LA DRUG ,GZHAN SDES BTAGS PA’I PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BDAG DGAG ,RANG SDES BTAGS PA’I PHUNG PO NYID BDAG TU ‘DOD PA DGAG ,DE GNYIS KYI LHAG MA’I PHYOGS RTEN DANG BRTEN PA SOGS GSUM DGAG ,DE NYID DANG GZHAN NYID DU MED PA’I GANG ZAG RDZAS YOD DGAG ,BDAG BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA TZAM DU BZHAG PA DPE DANG BCAS PAR BSHAD, DE LTAR BZHAG PA LA MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PA SPANG SLA BA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA’O,,

The first step here we will cover with six different topics:

 (1) denying the position concocted by other groups, who believe that there is a self which could exist which was essentially separate from the parts to the person;

(2) denying the position concocted by some of our own groups, who believe that the parts to the person themselves represent the self;

(3) denying positions other than these two, which themselves involve three ideas including one about the basis and what relies upon this basis;

(4) denying a substantial form of the person that would be neither itself nor something other than itself;

(5) explaining, with the use of a metaphor, how it is that we establish that the self is something labelled through dependence; and

(6) a demonstration of how setting things forth in this manner has the advantage of making it easy to eliminate the notion where we hold to things in some extreme way.


[3076]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these has two parts of its own: a statement of the position that the others take; and then disproving that position.  Here is the first.


[3077]
‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA’I DMIGS PA BDAG DE CI ZHIG CES DE NYID MI SHES PAS STON ZHIG CE NA,

Suppose that someone comes and poses the following question:

We would like to ask you just what the self which is the object of focus for the view of destruction could be; we personally can’t picture it, and hope you will enlighten us.


[3078]
‘DI LA GNYIS, GRANGS CAN GYI LUGS BRJOD PA DANG, BYE BRAG PA LA SOGS PA’I LUGS BRJOD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

In response we will cover this point in two stages.  That is, first we will describe the system of the Numerists.  And then secondly we’ll describe the system of the Detailers and so on.  Here then is the former.


	[3079]
[VI.121]
Ātmā tīrthyaiḥ kalpyate nityarūpo
‘kartābhoktā nirguṇo niṣkriyaś ca,
Kaṃcit kaṃcid bhedam āśritya tasya
bhedaṃ yātāḥ prakriyās tīrthikānām.

[VI.121a]
,ZA PO RTAG DNGOS BYED PO MIN PA’I BDAG
,YON TAN BYA MED MU STEGS RNAMS KYIS BRTAGS,

		That River system
		Imagines a consumer
		Which is a self that is
Unchanging & functioning;

Although not
The creator.

It does not have
The qualities, and
Performs no activity.	


[3080]
RE ZHIG DE ZA BA PO STE BDE SDUG SOGS LA LONGS SPYOD PA PO DANG, RTAG PA’I DNGOS PO [f. 216b] DANG RNAM ‘GYUR RNAMS KYI BYED PA PO MIN PA DANG, RDUL MUN SNYING STOBS KYI RANG BZHIN GYI YON TAN MED PA DANG, KHYAB PAR BYED PA NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR NA, BYA BA MED PAR MU STEGS GRANGS CAN RNAMS KYIS BRTAGS SO,,

Just to get a start here, that River system called the “Numerists” imagines a self which is a consumer—meaning the one who experiences pleasure and pain and the like.  They say that it is unchanging, but at the same time functioning; although it is not the creator of the expressions.  It does not have the nature of the three qualities of activity, darkness, and light.  It is the one thing which pervades all things, but it performs no activity.


[3081]
DE LA GRANGS CAN PA DAG NI,
,RTZA BA’I RANG BZHIN RNAM PAR ‘GYUR MIN LA,
,CHEN PO SOGS BDUN RANG BZHIN RNAM ‘GYUR ZHING,
,BCU DRUG PO NI RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA STE,
,SKYES BU RANG BZHIN MA YIN RNAM ‘GYUR MIN,
ZHES SMRA BAR BYED DO,,

Their own text on the topic says:

The fundamental nature is no creation;
The seven that include the great principle
Are both creator and creation.

Those sixteen are creations; and the soul
Is neither creator nor creation.


[3082]
DE LA ‘BRAS BU RAB TU BYED PAS NA RANG BZHIN NO,,

We call it the “fundamental nature” because it spews out results.


[3083]
SKABS GANG DU BYED CE NA, SKYES BU’I ‘DOD PA MTHONG BA’I DUS SU’O,,

When does it do this?  When it sees the soul’s desire.


[3084]
GANG GI TSE SGRA LA SOGS PA’I YUL NYE BAR LONGS SPYOD PA’I RNAM PA CAN GYI ‘DOD PA SKYES PA DE’I TSE SKYES BU’I ‘DOD PA YONGS SU SHES PA’I RANG BZHIN DANG SKYES BU SBYOR ZHING, DE NAS GTZO BOS SGRA LA SOGS PA ‘BYIN NO,,

A desire first arises in the soul, wishing to partake of sounds and so on.  The fundamental nature, which knows every wish of the soul, next joins with it; and then the primal nature gives forth the sounds and other objects.


[3085]
DE’I TSUL NI ‘DI YIN TE, RANG BZHIN LAS NI CHEN PO’O, ,DE LAS KYANG NGA RGYAL LO, ,DE LAS DBANG PO BCU GCIG DANG DE TZAM LNGA STE BCU DRUG PO’I TSOGS SO,,

Here’s the process through which this occurs.  It happens step by step: from the fundamental nature comes the great principle, and from that in turn comes the sense of self.  From the sense of self come the eleven powers, along with the five subtle elements—for a total of sixteen.


[3086]
BCU DRUG PA LAS KYANG ‘BYUNG BA LNGA NI DE TZAM LNGA LAS TE, SGRA LA SOGS PA LNGA LAS ‘BYUNG BA LNGA ‘BYUNG NGO ZHES BYA BA NI RIM PA YIN NO,,

From among the sixteen then, the five great elements derive from the five subtle elements; the order is indicated in the wording, “the five great elements come from sound and the rest of the five.”


[3087]
RNAM ‘GYUR MIN LA ZHES PA NI ‘BRAS BU RAB TU BYED PA KHO NA YIN GYI, CHEN PO LA SOGS PA LTAR RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA YANG NI MA YIN NO,,

When we say that something is “not a creation,” what we mean is that it only produces results, and is not itself a creation—as the great principle and the rest are.


[3088]
CHEN PO LA SOGS PA BDUN NI RAB TU BYED PA’ANG YIN LA RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA YANG YIN NO,,

The seven including the great principle are both creators and creations.


[3089]
CHEN PO LA SOGS PA YANG RANG GI RNAM ‘GYUR LA LTOS NAS RANG BZHIN YIN LA, RTZA BA’I RANG BZHIN LA LTOS NAS RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA YIN NO,,

The great principle and the others are creators from the perspective of the things which are their creations.  From the perspective of the root nature, though, they are creations.


[3090]
BLO’I DBANG PO LA SOGS PA BCU DRUG NI RNAM ‘GYUR KHO NA’O,,

The sixteen which include the sense power of the mind and so on are only creations.


[3091]
[f. 217a] SKYES BU NI RAB TU BYED PA’ANG MA YIN LA, RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA YANG MA YIN NO,,

The soul is neither a creator nor a creation.


[3092]
RNA BA LA SOGS PA’I DBANG PO LNGA YID KYIS BYIN GYIS BRLABS PAS YONGS SU GZUNG BA’I YUL SGRA LA SOGS PA DAG LA BLOS ZHEN PAR BYED LA, DE NAS BLOS ZHEN PAR BYAS PA’I DON LA SKYES BUS SEMS PAR BYED DO,,

The ear and the rest of the five powers, inspired by the mental sense power, cause the mind to yearn towards sound and the rest: the objects that they hold.  And then the soul turns its thoughts towards the objects that the mind has been yearning for.


[3093]
DE LTAR YUL LA SPYOD ‘DOD PAS YUL NYE BAR LONGS SPYOD CING, GANG GI TSE YUL LA CHAGS PA CHUNG BA NYID KYIS SKYES BUS YUL LA NYES DMIGS SU BLTAS PAS, CHAGS PA DANG BRAL BAR GYUR PA DE’I TSE RIM GYIS BSAM GTAN SGOM ZHING, DE LA BRTEN NAS LHA’I MIG GI MNGON ZHES THOB PA NA,

Out of a desire for these objects, the soul comes to partake of them.  At some point the desire for objects lessens, and the soul comes to see faults in these things.  Through becoming free of this desire, the soul cultivates meditative concentration—which leads to the achievement of the type of clairvoyance known as “the eyes of a god.”


[3094]
MIG DE’I SGO NAS GTZO BO LA LTA BAR BYED LA, DES BLTAS PA DANG, GTZO BO DE GZHAN GYI BUD MED LTAR NGO TSA BAR GYUR PAS, BDAG LA MI ‘GRO ZHING ‘BRAL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

The soul then looks upon the primal nature with these new eyes.  When it does, then the nature—like a woman who is being stared at by a man other than her husband—becomes shy, and shrinks from view.  This nature then no longer comes to the self, and becomes disconnected from it.


[3095]
RNAM ‘GYUR GYI TSOGS THAMS CAD KYANG SKYE BA’I RIM PA LAS BZLOG PA’I SGO NAS GTZO BO DE NYID DU RAB TU THIM PA’I PHYIR, MI GSAL BA’I NGO BOR GYUR PA DE’I TSE SKYES BU NYAG GCIG GNAS TE, DE’I PHYIR GROL BA ZHES BYA’O,,

At this point the entire group of expressions—the creations—dissolves completely back into the primal nature, in reverse order to the process by which they were created.  The nature then is reduced to its own featureless essential form, and the soul simply rests in total isolation.  This is how this system describes liberation.


[3096]
BDAG DE NI RTAG TU YAN GAR BA’I NGO BOR GNAS PA’I PHYIR RTAG PA ZHES BYA’O,,

Since the self will rest then, forever alone in its essence, they speak of it as “unchanging.”


[3097]
GANG ZHIG NI BYED PA PO YIN LA GANG ZHIG NI BYED PA PO MA YIN ZHE NA, ‘DI LA RDUL MUN SNYING STOBS RNAMS NI YON TAN GSUM MO, ,DE LA RDUL NI G-YO BA DANG ‘JUG PA’I BDAG NYID CAN NO, ,MUN PA NI LCI BA DANG G-YOG PA’I BDAG NYID CAN NO, ,SNYING STOBS NI YANG BA DANG RAB TU GSAL BA’I BDAG NYID CAN NO, ,BDE BA DANG SDUG BSNGAL DANG GTI MUG ZHES PA NI ‘DI DAG KHO NA’I RNAM [f. 217b] GRANGS SO,,

Let’s talk about which of these are creators, and which are not.  The three qualities are activity, darkness, and light.  Activity has the nature of action and engagement.  Darkness has the nature of heaviness, and of smothering.  Light has the nature of lightness, and brightness.  When we speak of pleasure, pain, and dark ignorance, they are synonyms for these three.


[3098]
‘DI DAG CHA MNYAM PA’I SKABS NI GTZO BO STE, ‘DIR YON TAN DAG GTZOR GYUR CING RAB TU ZHI BAR GYUR PA’I PHYIR RO,,

“Primal nature” refers to a state of balance between these three, because the three qualities are both primary to that state and at rest in that state.


[3099]
DE DAG RNAM PAR MI ‘GYUR BA’I SKABS NI RANG BZHIN NO,,

We call it “fundamental nature” when these qualities are in a state where they no longer fluctuate.


[3100]
RANG BZHIN LAS NI CHEN PO STE, CHEN PO DANG BLO GNYIS NI RNAM GRANGS TE PHYI YUL DANG NANG GI SKYES BU’I GZUGS BRNYAN GNYIS KA ‘CHAR BA ZHIG GO ,CHEN PO LAS NI NGA RGYAL LO,,

From that fundamental nature comes the great principle.  “Great principle” and “intellect” refer to the same thing.  It reflects both the images of objects which are outside, as well as that of the soul, which is inside.


[3101]
NGA RGYAL NI GSUM STE RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA CAN DANG, SNYING STOBS CAN DANG, MUN PA CAN NO,,

From the great principle comes the sense of self, and from the sense of self come three groups of things which relate to the activeness, darkness, or light.


[3102]
DE LA RNAM PAR ‘GYUR BA’I NGA RGYAL LAS NI DE TZAM LNGA STE, GZUGS DANG SGRA DANG DRI DANG RO DANG REG PA DAG GO

From the sense of self relating to activity come the five subtle elements: sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangible things.


[3103]
,DE TZAM DAG LAS NI ‘BYUNG BA RNAMS TE, SA DANG CHU DANG ME DANG RLUNG DANG NAM MKHA’ ZHES BYA BA DAG GO

From those subtle elements come the great ones, called “earth,” “water,” “fire,” “wind,” and “space.”


[3104]
,SNYING STOBS CAN GYI NGA RGYAL LAS NI LAS KYI DBANG PO LNGA PO DAG {%NGAG} DANG LAG PA DANG RKANG PA DANG RKUB DANG, ‘DOMS KYI DBANG PO DANG, BLO’I DBANG PO LNGA PO MIG DANG RNA BA DANG SNA DANG LCE DANG LPAGS PA’AM LUS KYI DBANG PO DANG, GNYIS KA’I BDAG NYID CAN GYI YID DE DE LTAR NA BCU GCIG GO

Eleven expressions come from the sense of self related to light.  They are five organs of action (speech, hands, legs, anus, and sexual organ) and the five sense organs (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin or body sense power).  The combination of the organs of action and the sense organs amounts to the mental sense power.


[3105]
,MUN PA CAN GYI NGA RGYAL NI NGA RGYAL GZHAN GNYIS KA’I ‘JUG PAR BYED PA’O,,

The sense of self related to darkness inspires the activities of the other two qualities.


[3106]
DE LA CHEN PO DANG NGA RGYAL DANG DE TZAM LNGA STE BDUN NI RANG BZHIN DANG RNAM ‘GYUR GNYIS KA’O,,

The group of seven made up of the great principle, the sense of self, and the five subtle elements are both creators and creations.


[3107]
DBANG PO BCU DANG YID DANG ‘BYUNG BA LNGA NI RNAM ‘GYUR KHO NA DANG,

The ten powers, the mind, and the five great elements are only creations.


[3108]
RTZA BA’I RANG BZHIN GTZO BO NI RANG BZHIN KHO NA’O ZHES PA NI GZHUNG LUGS SO,,

The root nature—the primal nature—is only a creator.  This is what their text is saying.



The system of the Detailers

[3109]
GNYIS PA NI,

Here then is the second point mentioned above: a description of the system of the Detailers and so on.


	[3110]
[VI.121b]
,DE’I DBYE CUNG ZAD CUNG ZAD LA BRTEN NAS,
,MU STEGS CAN RNAMS LUGS NI THA DAD ‘GYUR,

	Based upon various
	Minor distinctions,

	There have developed
	The different systems
	Of the River Schools.


[3111]
JI LTAR GRANGS CAN DAG GIS BDAG KHAS BLANGS PA DE BZHIN DU, BDAG DE’I DBYE BA CUNG ZAD CUNG ZAD LA BRTEN NAS MU STEGS CAN RNAMS KYI LUGS NI THA DAD PAR ‘GYUR TE,

Thus then do those of the Numerist School accept the idea of a self; and based upon various minor distinctions in this presentation of a self, there have developed the different systems of the River Schools.


[3112]
‘DI LTA STE BYE BRAG PA RNAMS NI BLO DANG BDE BA DANG SDUG BSNGAL DANG, ‘DOD [f. 218a] PA DANG SDANG BA DANG ‘BAD PA DANG CHOS DANG CHOS MA YIN PA DANG BYA BA’I SHUGS TE, BDAG GI YON TAN DGU SMRA BAR BYED DO,,

Here is how we describe these systems.  The Detailers profess that there are nine different attributes of the self; these include (1) mind; (2) pleasure; (3) suffering; (4) desire; (5) aversion; (6) endeavor; (7) teachings; (8) the opposite of the teachings; and (9) the power of action.


[3113]
DE LA BLO NI YUL ‘DZIN PA’O,,

(1) The mind is that which perceives objects.


[3114]
BDE BA NI ‘DOD PA’I YUL NYAMS SU MYONG BA’O,,

(2) Pleasure is that which undergoes desirable objects.


[3115]
SDUG BSNGAL NI DE LAS BZLOG PA’O,,

(3) Suffering is the opposite of that.


[3116]
‘DOD PA NI ‘DOD PAR GYUR PA’I DNGOS PO LA RE BA ‘CHA’ BA’O,,

(4) Desire is the aspiration to attain desirable entities.


[3117]
SDANG BA NI MI ‘DOD PA’I YUL LA RGYAB KYIS PHYOGS PA NYID DO,,

(5) Aversion is feelings of repulsion towards undesirable objects.


[3118]
‘BAD PA NI DON BSGRUB PAR BYA BA LA DE’I MTHAR THUG PAR SEMS KYI MKHAS PA NYID DO,,

(6) Endeavor consists of a special mental fluency in achieving the final ends of attempts to accomplish some goal.


[3119]
GANG LAS MNGON PAR MTHO BA DANG NGES PAR LEGS PA ‘GRUB PA DE NI CHOS SO,,

(7) Teachings are those things which allow us to achieve higher rebirths and final good.


[3120]
DE LAS BZLOG PA NI CHOS MA YIN PA’O,,

(8) The reverse of that is what we refer to when we speak of the opposite of the teachings.


[3121]
SHES PA LAS SKYES SHING SHES PA’I RGYUR GYUR PA NI ‘DU BYA BA’I SHUGS SO,,

(9) The power of undertaking action is born of understanding, and is also the cause of understanding.


[3122]
BDAG GI YON TAN DGU PO DE JI SRID DU BDAG LA ‘DU ZHING YOD PA DE SRID DU, DE DAG GIS SBYAR BA’I DGE BA DANG MI DGE BA’I LAS SGRUB PA’I PHYIR ‘KHOR BAR ‘GYUR LA,

As long as these nine attributes of the self are incorporated into ourselves—as long as they are present there—then we tend to undertake good deeds and bad karma utilizing the nine. This then causes us to circle in the wheel of pain.


[3123]
GANG GI TSE SKYES BU YANG DAG PAR RTOGS PA’I SHES PAS BLO LA SOGS PA’I YON TAN RNAMS RTZA BA DANG BCAS PAR GCOD PA DE’I TSE, RANG GI BDAG NYID LA GNAS SHING THAR BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

At some point, knowledge which has a perfect understanding of the individual is able to cut off mind and the other attributes, along with their roots.  When we arrive at this place, we are residing in our true self, and we reach freedom.


[3124]
BDAG DE YANG RTAG PA DANG, ‘BRAS BU’I BYED PA PO DANG, ‘BRAS BU LA LONGS SPYOD PA’I ZA BA PO DANG, YON TAN DANG BCAS PA DANG, KHYAB PA’I PHYIR NA BYA BA MED PAR YANG SMRA’O,,

This self is also described as being beyond all activity, for it is unchanging; it is the creator of all results; it is the consumer which undergoes all results; it is the one that possesses qualities; and it is overarching.


[3125]
BYE BRAG PA KHA CIG SKUM PA DANG, RKYONG BA NYID KYIS BYA BA DANG BCAS PAR KHAS LEN NO,,

There are some members of the Detailers who accept the idea that this self also involves the activities of perfect retraction and extension.


[3126]
RIG BYED DU SMRA BA DAG NI BUM PA LA SOGS PA THA DAD PA RNAMS KYI NAM MKHA’ GCIG YIN PA LTAR, RTEN LUS THA DAD PAS BRTEN PA BDAG GCIG NYID SNA TSOGS PA NYID DO ZHES PA LA SOGS PAR [f. 218b] KHAS LEN NO,,

Those who follow the ancient books of knowledge point to the way in which a water pitcher and other such separate objects share a single space.  In the same way, they say, there is a single grand self that rests upon all the separate bodies there are; and thus they can refer to that as “the multiplicity of things.”  And so they maintain these and other similar beliefs.


[3127]
‘GREL PAR BDAG GI KHYAD PAR CUNG ZAD CUNG ZAD LA BRTEN NAS MU STEGS CAN RNAMS KYI LUGS PHAN TSUN THA DAD PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS GZHUNG ‘DI’I LUGS KYIS GRANGS CAN DE’I DBYE BA LA BRTEN NAS, MU STEGS KYI LUGS SO SOR GYES PAR ‘CHAD PA NI DON MA GO BA’O,,

The autocommentary notes that “the systems of the River Schools are distinguished from each other by various slight differences in how they see the self.”  As such, people who say that the different divisions of the River Schools in general are based upon the divisions within the Numerists as described in this one classic text have not caught its import correctly.



Disproving others on the self

[3128]
GNYIS PA NI,

This then brings us to our second part from before: disproving the position that others have taken here.


	[3129]
[VI.122]
Itthaṃbhūtasyātmano nāsti sattvaṃ
nāhaṃkārasyāśrayaś caiṣa yuktaḥ,
Vandhyāputrasyeva jāter viyogān
no saṃvṛtyāpīṣyate sattvam asya.

,MO GSHAM BU LTAR SKYE BA DANG BRAL PHYIR,
,DE LTAR GYUR PA’I BDAG NI YOD MIN ZHING,
,’DI NI NGAR ‘DZIN RTEN DU’ANG MI RIGS LA,
,’DI NI KUN RDZOB TU YANG YOD MI ‘DOD,

		Because things
		Are devoid of arising,
		
Like the child
		Of a barren woman,

		It is not the case
With the self—
		They are not reality.

		This cannot
		Logically be
		The basis for

		Our tendency to
		Grasp to some “me [f. 210b].”

		We deny
		The existence
		In a deceptive sense
		As well.


[3130]
MU STEGS CAN RNAMS KYI GZHUNG LUGS RE RE LAS BDAG MI ‘DRA BA GANG ZHIG SMRAS PA DE NI, DE DAG GIS JI LTAR BTAGS PA DE LTAR GYUR PA STE DE KHO NA NYID DU YOD PA MIN STE, SKYE BA DANG BRAL PA STE MA SKYES PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’I RTAGS NI MU STEGS RANG GI RJES SU DPAG PA STE KHAS BLANGS PA’O,,

The various scriptural traditions within the River Schools thus then present different versions of the self.  But it is not the case that what they impute here is the way things actually are: it is not the case that it is indeed reality.  The reasoning which says that “things are devoid of arising, because they cannot have arisen” is just the River Schools expressing their own process of deduction: their own position.


[3131]
DPER NA MO GSHAM GYI BU LTAR RO,,

And then they would say, “It’s like the child of a barren woman.”


[3132]
RTAGS DES SMRAS PA’I CHOS CAN BKAG KYANG SKYON MED PA NI RTAGS DANG CHOS GNYIS KA RNAM BCAD TZAM YIN PA’I GNAD KYIS SO,,

They would hold the idea then that the expressed subject of the logical statement was voided by the reason presented—and for them there would be no problem with that.  And that’s because of the cogent point here that both the reason presented and the subject under consideration were both simple absences.


[3133]
DE LTAR GZHAN GYIS BRTAGS PA’I BDAG ‘DI NI NGAR ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES KYI RTEN DU’ANG MI RIGS TE, RTAGS DANG DPE NI SNGAR BZHIN NO,,

As such we can say that this self as perceived by these other schools of thought cannot logically be the one that provides the basis for the inborn version of our tendency to grasp to some “me.”  The reason for saying this, and the consistent example to support that reasoning, are as we have described them earlier.


[3134]
NGAR ‘DZIN GYI RTEN ZHES PA NI DMIGS RNAM GNYIS KYI NANG NAS DMIGS PA’I YUL MA YIN ZHES PA STE, DE’I YUL NI NGA TZAM DANG GANG ZAG SOGS YIN LA, DE YANG DNGOS POR ‘DOD PAS MA SKYES PA DANG ‘GAL BA’O,,

When we speak of “the support of our tendency to hold to some ‘me’,” we are referring to two possible objects of focus.  One of these can be called “the non-object of that focus,” which is the object of this tendency represented by the simple “me”; the person; or something of the like.  This is something that we accept as being a functional entity; and so it contradicts the concept of never arising.


[3135]
RNAM PA’I YUL NI GANG ZAG GI BDAG YIN PAS DE NI THA SNYAD TZAM DU YANG MA GRUB PA YIN PAS, MA SKYES PA DANG MI ‘GAL LO,,

Then there is the object as represented by the aspect here—which would refer to the self-nature of the person.  This is not something which can exist even in a nominal sense, and so it would not contradict the idea of things never arising.


[3136]
DE’I PHYIR ‘DI’I LUGS KYIS GANG ZAG GI BDAG THA SNYAD DU YOD PAR ‘DOD DO ZHES PA NI ‘DI PA’I GRUB MTHA’I ‘GANGS DANG, ‘JIG LTA’I DMIGS RNAM GYI YUL ZHIB TU MA PHYED PAR BYUNG RGYAL DU SMRA BA’O,,

Therefore those who say that “The way that this present system accepts the existence of the self-nature to the person, at least nominally, is its one most crucial concept” and then failing to distinguish this carefully from the object represented by the aspect of focus taken on by the view of destruction represents no more than blurting out whatever comes to their minds.


[3137]
DE LTAR BDAG YOD PA DANG NGAR ‘DZIN GYI YUL YIN PA [f. 219a] BKAG PA NI DGAG BYA LA DON DAM GYI KHYAD PAR SBYAR BA’I DBANG DU BYAS PA’O,,

As such, the case is that when we deny the existence of a self, and that thing which the tendency to hold to a “me” takes as its object, this is all done relative to applying the additional qualification of speaking ultimately to the object we deny.


[3138]
DE KHO NAR MA ZAD KUN RDZOB TU YANG DE GNYIS ‘GOG PA YANG SHES PAR BYA STE, DE’I TSE BDAG YOD PAR MI ‘DOD CES PA NI BDAG RDZAS SU YOD PA MIN PA’O,,

And that’s not all; you should also understand that we are denying these two in a deceptive sense as well.  At that point, when we say that we deny the existence of a self, this does not consist of a self which exists substantially.


[3139]
RTAGS DANG DPE DE GNYIS KYIS DGAG BYA GNYIS ‘GOG PAR MA ZAD KYI, GZHAN YANG MU STEGS PAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG DE’I KHYAD PAR KUN KYANG YOD PA MA YIN NO ZHES BYA BAR RIG PAR BYA’O,,

It is not only the case that this reason and this consistent example—these two—are being used to disprove two different objects which we deny.  You should also understand that here we are saying as well that all the possible features of all the kinds of self imagined by the River Schools are things that could never exist.


	[3140]
[VI.123]
,GANG PHYIR BSTAN BCOS BSTAN BCOS LAS DE’I KHYAD,
,MU STEGS RNAMS KYIS GANG BSTAN DE KUN LA,
,RANG GRAGS MA SKYES GTAN TSIGS KYIS GNOD PA,
,DE PHYIR DE KHYAD KUN KYANG YOD MA YIN,

		It’s because
		All the features that
		These River Schools
		Describe both in

		Those classical commentaries
		And these classical commentaries

		Are themselves
		Drawn into question
		
		By the logic of things
		Never arising
		That they declare among
		Themselves so widely.

		These characteristics
		Are, none of them,
		Things that can exist.
	

[3141]
DE’I RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA GRANGS CAN GYI BSTAN BCOS DANG, BYE BRAG PA SOGS KYI BSTAN BCOS LAS BDAG DE’I KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS MU STEGS RNAMS KYIS GANG BSTAN PA DE KUN LA STE THAMS CAD LA, MU STEGS RANG LA GRAGS PA’I MA SKYES PA’I GTAN TSIGS KYIS GNOD PA DE’I PHYIR RO,,

And why is that?  It’s because every one of the features of the self as it is presented both in those classical commentaries of the Numerists, and in these classical commentaries of the Detailers and other such schools—all those qualities that these River Schools describe—are themselves drawn into question by the logic of things never arising that these schools declare among themselves so widely.


[3142]
DE YANG SNGAR BSHAD PA’I GRANGS CAN DANG BYE BRAG PA’I BDAG GI KHYAD PAR BSHAD PA KUN KYANG YOD PA MA YIN NO ZHES DGAG PAR BYA’O,,

With this then the characteristics of the self that we have heard up to here explained by the Numerists and the Detailers are, none of them, things that can exist.  This is the denial we are making here.


[3143]
PHYOGS ‘DIS NI BDAG TU SMRA BA THAMS CAD DU MA SKYES PA’I GTAN TSIGS DANG MO GSHAM GYI BU YI DPES, DE DAG GIS BTAGS PA’I BDAG GI NGO BO DANG KHYAD PAR RNAMS GSAL BAR RIG PAR BYA’O,,

You should understand then that this position completely discounts both the essential nature and the particular qualities of the self that these other schools imagine is there.  This is accomplished by presenting both the logic involving the way in which things cannot arise, and the consistent example of the son of a barren woman, to all the groups that profess the existence of some self.


	[3144]
[VI.124]
Skandhebhyo’nyo vidyate nāta ātmā
hitvā skandhāṃs tad grahasyāprasiddheḥ,
Lokasyāhaṃkāra buddher apīṣṭo
naivādhāro’tadvidām ātmadṛṣṭeḥ.

,DE PHYIR PHUNG PO LAS GZHAN BDAG MED DE,
,PHUNG PO MA GTOGS DE ‘DZIN MA GRUB PHYIR,
,’JIG RTEN NGAR ‘DZIN BLO YI RTEN DU YANG,
,MI ‘DOD DE RIG MIN PA’ANG BDAG LTA’I PHYIR,

		And this is why
		There is no self
		Separate from the
		Parts of the person:

		Because you could
		Never establish
		The capacity to hold
		To some that didn’t
		Involve the parts.

		Neither are we saying
		That it is the basis
		For the tendency
		To hold to some “me”

		That the world
		Thinks of;

		That is not something
		Which could ever
		Make sense.

		And that’s because
		Even then we could
		View something
		As the self.
	

[3145]
DE’I PHYIR PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO GZHAN PA’I BDAG MED DE, PHUNG PO BZUNG BA MA GTOGS PAR BDAG DE YAN GAR DU ‘DZIN PA MA GRUB PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And this is why we can say that there is no self which is essentially separate from the parts of the person; and that’s because you could never establish the capacity to hold to some discrete self that didn’t involve holding to the parts of the person.


[3146]
DE NI BDAG PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD NA ‘BREL BA GNYIS KA MED PAS ‘BREL MED DU ‘GYUR LA,

What this is saying is that—if there were to exist some self that were essentially separate from the parts to the person—then neither of the two possible types of relationship would hold; meaning that there would be no connection to anything.


[3147]
DE’I TSE BUM PA MA BZUNG BAR SNAM BU YAN GAR DU ‘DZIN PA BZHIN DU ‘DZIN PA ZHIG ‘ONG DGOS NA, DE ‘GAR YANG MA MTHONG BA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’O,,

In this case then it would be similar to saying that to perceive a bolt of cloth discretely, you would have to go and be careful not to perceive a water pitcher.  If this were the way that holding things had to work, then—what we are saying is—you would never see holding with anything.


[3148]
DE LTAR YANG RTZA SHE LAS,
,BDAG [f. 219b] NI NYE BAR LEN PA LAS,
,GZHAN DU ‘THAD PA NYID MA YIN,
,GAL TE GZHAN NA LEN MED PAR,
,GZUNG YOD RIGS NA GZUNG DU MED,

On this point we see, in Wisdom, the following lines:

It would be totally
Incorrect to say
That the self was something
Other than the parts
That we have taken on.

If it were not this way,
And it were correct
To say that we could hold
To something without
Taking it, then we
Could never hold to anything.


[3149]
CES DANG,
,GAL TE PHUNG PO RNAMS LAS GZHAN,
,PHUNG PO’I MTSAN NYID MED PAR ‘GYUR,

We also read:

	If it were something other
	Than the parts to the person,
	There would be no definition
	Of it being the parts.


[3150]
ZHES GSUNGS TE NYE BAR LEN PA NI PHUNG PO’O,,

When the reference here is read simply as “what we have taken on,” you should understand that it is referring to the parts to the person that we have taken on.


[3151]
SKYON GZHAN YANG PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BDAG ‘DI ‘JIG RTEN SEMS CAN GYI THOG MA MED PA NAS KYI NGAR ‘DZIN GYI BLO YI RTEN TE DMIGS PAR YANG MI ‘DOD DE,

There is another problem here as well.  That is, neither are we saying that this supposed self which is essentially separate from the parts to a person is the basis or object of focus for the tendency to hold to some “me” that the world—which is to say, living beings—has tended to think of “me,” for time with no beginning.


[3152]
MU STEGS KYIS BTAGS PA LTAR GYI BDAG DE RIG PA MIN PA STE DE’I RNAM PAR MI ‘DZIN PA’ANG MNGON PAR ZHEN PA’I KHYAD PAR LAS BDAG DANG BDAG GI ZHES BDAG TU LTA BAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Which is to say, that self as it is imagined by the River Schools is not something which could ever make sense.  And that’s because, if it could, then that would mean that even if then we didn’t perceive any aspect of it, we could view something as the self—as being “self” or “something of the self”—simply by virtue of a strong wrong belief about it. 


[3153]
‘DI NI NGAR ‘DZIN BLO YI RTEN DU’ANG MI RIGS ZHES SNGAR BKAG PA DANG MI ZLOS TE, SNGAR NI BDAG RDZAS SU YOD PA TZAM BDAG LTA’I DMIGS PA YIN PA BKAG LA, ‘DIR NI PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA DMIGS PA YIN PA BKAG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This by the way is not just a simple repetition of the denial that we made earlier, where we also said that it would be illogical to say that this self was the support for the tendency to believe in some “me.”  In that previous case, we were denying only that a self which existed in a substantial way could serve as the object of focus for the belief in a self.  What we’re denying now is that this object of focus could be something that was essentially separate from the parts to the person.


[3154]
CI STE GANG ZAG GANG DAG DA LTA BDAG DE RTAG PA DANG MA SKYES PA LA SOGS PAS KHYAD PAR DU BYAS PA MI SHES PA DE DAG LA YANG SNGON GOMS PA’I DBANG GIS BDAG DE’I YUL CAN NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I LTA BA YOD PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NA,

One might wonder then about the following question:

Suppose we have a person who in the present moment does not perceive the self as being distinguished by characteristics such as being unchanging, or having never arisen.  Wouldn’t it be the case though that they too—by force of what they had become accustomed to in the past—could possess the view where they held that the subject aspect of the self was “me”?


[3155]
DE NI MA YIN TE GRUB MTHA’ NGAN PAS BLO BSGYUR BA KHO NA LA, PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BDAG NGAR ‘DZIN GYI RTEN DU ‘DZIN PA YOD PA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Our answer is that it would not be the case.  And that’s because it is only with those individuals whose minds have been influenced by inferior schools of thought that the tendency to hold to some “me” grasps onto, as its basis, a self which is essentially separate from the parts to a person.


[3156]
SEMS CAN GANG DAG LA SNGAR GRUB MTHA’ NGAN PA’I GOMS PA MED PA DE DAG LA YANG ‘DIR NGAR ‘DZIN ‘JUG PAR MTHONG STE, ‘DI LTA STE,

We do however also see here—with individuals who have not previously become accustomed to some inferior school of thought—the mind engaging in the tendency to hold to some “me.”  And here is how that works.


	[3157]
[VI.125]
Tiryakto ye kalpaśaḥ saṃpravṛddhā
nityājātaṃ te’pi paśyanti nainam,
Dṛṣṭvā teṣām apyahaṃkāra vṛttiṃ
skandhebhyo’nyas tena nātmāsti kaścit.

,GANG DAG DUD ‘GRO BSKAL MANG BRKYAL GYUR PA,
,DES KYANG MA SKYES RTAG ‘DI MA MTHONG LA,
,NGAR ‘DZIN DE DAG LA YANG ‘JUG MTHONG STE,
,DES NA PHUNG PO [210b] LAS GZHAN BDAG ‘GA’ MED,

		Consider too
Those beings
		Who have passed
		Their lives—

		Over the length
		Of many eons—
		As an animal:

		Those who may not
		Be perceiving it
		As never starting,
		And as unchanging.

		Even with these
		We can see
		Engaging in
		Grasping on
		To some “me.”

		We can say then
		That there does not
		Exist any kind
		Of a self at all

		Which could be
		Separate from the
Parts to a person.


[3158]
SEMS CAN GANG DAG DUD ‘GROR BSKAL PA MANG POR TSE BRGYAL {%BRKYAL} BAR GYUR PA SNGAR DE TZAM SONG DU ZIN KYANG, DA DUNG DU YANG DUD ‘GRO’I SKYE GNAS [f. 220a] LAS LDOG PAR MI ‘GYUR BA DES KYANG,

Consider here beings who have passed their lives—over the length of many eons—in an existence as an animal.  Despite the fact that they have spent so long this way in their past, that doesn’t mean that they too will necessarily be able to turn away from a birth as an animal in the time to come.


[3159]
MU STEGS KYIS BTAGS PA’I MA SKYES PA DANG RTAG PA’I BDAG ‘DI MA MTHONG BA DE DAG LA YANG, NGAR ‘DZIN ‘JUG PAR MTHONG BA STE SHES NAS,

The same applies to those who may not be perceiving any self as imagined by those of the River Schools; that is, a self which has never started, and which is unchanging.  Even with these individuals we can see—we can perceive—cases where they engage in grasping on to some “me.”


[3160]
SHES RAB CAN SU ZHIG MU STEGS PAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG RNAM PA DE LTA BU NGAR ‘DZIN GYI RTEN DU ZHEN PAR BYED,

What person then of intelligence would get attached to thinking that the support for this kind of a tendency to hold to a “me” would necessarily have to be supplied by the type of self concocted by the River Schools?


[3161]
DES NA PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO GZHAN PA’I BDAG ‘GA’ANG MED DO,,

In conclusion then we can say that there does not exist any kind of a self at all which could be essentially separate from the parts to a person.


[3162]
KYANG GI SGRAS NI DMYAL BA LA SOGS PAR SKYES PA RNAMS SDUD PA’O,,

When we said “they too” a few sentences back, we meant it to be read as including as well beings such as those who had taken birth in the hell realms, or the like.



Other groups on parts
being a self

[3163]
GNYIS PA LA LNGA, PHUNG PO BDAG TU ‘DOD PA LA GNOD BYED BSTAN PA, DE LTAR ‘DOD PAR MI RIGS PA’I SGRUB BYED BSTAN PA, PHUNG PO BDAG TU SMRA BA LA GNOD BYED GZHAN BSTAN PA, PHUNG PO BDAG TU GSUNGS PA SOGS KYI DGONGS PA BSHAD PA, GZHAN GYI LUGS ‘BREL MED DU BSTAN PA’O,, 

These brings us to our second topic from above: denying the position concocted by some of our own groups, who believe that the parts to the person themselves represent the self.  This we offer in five different sections—

1) A presentation of problems with the position that the parts to the person constitute the self;

2) A presentation of support for saying that this kind of belief is incorrect;

3) A presentation of other problems with saying that the parts to the person are the self;

4) An explanation of the actual intent behind statements that the parts to the person are the self, and so on; and

5) A demonstration that the position of others here is irrelevant to the case.


[3164]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, SKYON SPONG GI LAN DGAG PA’O,,

The first section has two parts of its own: the actual point; and then refuting the answer, where the other side attempts to deny the problems we’ve raised.


[3165]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these, in turn, covers two sections of its own: a statement of the other side’s position, and then a denial of that particular position.


	[3166]
[VI.126]
Skandhā evālambanaṃ tvātma dṛṣṭeḥ
skandhebhyo’nyasyātmanaḥ siddhyabhāvāt,
Skandhān pañcāpyeka icchanti kecic
cittaṃ tvekaṃ niśrayāyātma dṛṣṭeḥ.

,PHUNG PO LAS GZHAN BDAG GRUB MED PA’I PHYIR,
,BDAG LTA’I DMIGS PA PHUNG PO KHO NA’O,
,KHA CIG BDAG LTA’I RTEN DU PHUNG PO NI,
,LNGA CHAR YANG ‘DOD KHA CIG SEMS GCIG ‘DOD,

		There is no self
		Which exists
		As separate from
		The parts to
		The person.

		As such,
		Seeing a self
		Takes as its
		Object of focus
		Only the parts.

		Some number
		Describe the support
		Of the view of a self
	
		As consisting
		Of all five
Of the parts.

		Some assert
		That it is only
		The mind.


[3167]
‘DIR RANG GI SDE PA DAG NA RE PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO GZHAN PA’I BDAG GRUB PA MED PA’I PHYIR BDAG TU LTA BA STE ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA’I DMIGS RNAM GNYIS KYI NANG GI DMIGS PA NI PHUNG PO KHO NA YIN TE, PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA DANG NANG GI PHUNG PO DMIGS PAR ‘JOG PA GNYIS SU NGES PA LAS SNGA MA MI RUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here certain of our own groups make the following argument:

There is no self which exists as essentially separate from the parts to the person; as such, the tendency to see a self—which is to say, the view of destruction, which has two objects of its focus—takes as its inner object of focus only the parts to the person.  And that’s due to the fact that the objects of focus here are fixed at two—no more, no less: one which is essentially separate from these parts to a person, and a second which is focused on the heaps inside; and it would be inappropriate here to include the former.


[3168]
DE’I PHYIR BDAG NI RANG GI PHUNG PO TZAM YIN NO ZER RO,,

As such—they say—the self consists of our own heaps, and nothing else.


[3169]
PHYOGS ‘DI NI GNAS MA BU’I SDE PA LA SOGS PA ‘PHAGS PA MANG POS BKUR BA’I SDE PA’I ‘O, ,DE LAS KYANG MANG BKUR BA KHA CIG BDAG LTA’I RTEN DU STE DMIGS PAR NI,

This particular position is one of the Vatsiputra and certain other sections within what is called the “Widely Respected Group,” itself named from a very honored, realized being.  Here is the way that some number of the members of the Widely Respected describe the support, or object of focus, of the view of a self.  


[3170]
RANG GI PHUNG PO LNGA CHAR YANG ‘DOD CING, BDAG [f. 220b] TU MNGON PAR ZHEN PA ‘DI YANG PHUNG PO LNGA PO DE LAS YIN NO ZHES SMRA STE,

They would state first that this object consists of all five of the parts to the person; and that when we say that someone is strongly attached to the idea of a self, this is something that comes from those same five parts.


[3171]
JI SKAD DU BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS DGE SLONG DAG DGE SBYONG NGAM BRAM ZE GANG SU DAG CIG BDAG GO SNYAM DU YANG DAG PAR RJES SU LTA BA DE DAG NI, NYE BAR LEN PA’I PHUNG PO LNGA PO ‘DI KHO NA LA YANG DAG PAR RJES SU LTA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

On this point they would reference the Conqueror himself, who made the following very clear statement on the matter:

Think, o monks, of any spiritual practitioner or brahmin who holds the complete form of this view where they think, “There is some kind of self here.”  What they are focusing on in this complete way is the five parts to a person that have been taken on; and nothing else.


[3172]
DE NYID KYI PHYIR DE DAG LA KHYED CAG GI LTA BA ‘DI NI ‘JIG PA’I BDAG NYID CAN GYI TSOGS PA LA YIN GYI BDAG GAM BDAG GI BA LA NI MA YIN NO, ZHES GSAL BAR MDZAD PA’I SLAD DU,

And it is for this exact reason that it is the view which all of you entertain towards these things which is the one directed towards the collection characterized by destruction; it is not directed at the self, or that which belongs to the self.


[3173]
BDAG DANG BDAG GI BA’I RNAM PAR ZHUGS PA’I LTA BA LA ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BAR GSUNGS SO, ZHES SMRAS TE, NYER LEN GYI PHUNG PO LNGA LA LTA’O

And so what this is saying is that what was described as the view of the collection of destruction is one which is focused upon the self, and what belongs to the self.  That is, it is focused upon the five parts to a person that we have taken on.


[3174]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LA BRTEN NAS BDAG LTA’I DMIGS PA PHUNG PO LNGAR KHAS BLANGS SO,,

And so—based on this statement—this group would say that the object of focus for the view of a self is the five parts to the person.


[3175]
MANG BKUR BA KHA CIG NI SEMS GCIG PU LA BDAG GO ZHES ‘DOD DE,
,BDAG NYID BDAG GI MGON YIN GYI,
,GZHAN NI SU ZHIG MGON DU ‘GYUR,
,BDAG NYID LEGS PAR THUL BAS NI,
,MKHAS PAS MTHO RIS THOB PAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES TSIGS SU BCAD PA LAS SEMS LA BDAG GI SGRAR GSUNGS SO,,

Some members of the Widely Respected Group assert that it is only the mind which is the self, given that the following lines speak of the mind as the “self”:

The self itself
Is the protector of the self;
Where else can we see one?

When they master
Restraining this self itself,

The wise attain
The higher forms of birth.


[3176]
‘DI GA LAS SHE NA, PHUNG PO LAS THA DAD PA’I BDAG MED PA’I PHYIR DANG, MDO GZHAN LAS KYANG, ,SEMS ‘DUL BAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR TE,
,SEMS ‘DUL BA NI LEGS PA STE,
,SEMS ‘DUL BA NI BDE BA ‘DREN,
ZHES BYA BA DE LAS SO,,

From where can we understand this?  First of all, there is no self which is separate from the parts to the person.  And other sutras state as well that it is the mind which we have to restrain:

	Restraining the mind
	Is a goodness;

	Restraining the mind
	Brings on happiness.


[3177]
DE’I PHYIR NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I GZHI SEMS LA BDAG CES GDAGS SO ZHE’O,,

That’s then why it is that when we speak of the basis for holding something to be “me,” we are referring to the mind as the “self.”


[3178]
RTOG GE ‘BAR BA LAS KYANG, ‘DI LTAR KHO BO CAG KYANG THA SNYAD DU RNAM PAR SHES PA LA BDAG GI SGRA DNGOS SU ‘DOGS TE, ‘DI LTAR RNAM PAR SHES PA NI YANG SRID PA LEN PA’I PHYIR BDAG [f. 221a] YIN NO, ZHES LUS DANG DBANG PO’I TSOGS DAG LA NYE BAR ‘DOGS PA’I PHYIR TE ZHES DANG,

The Blaze of Reasoning too says,

And so it is that we as well—at least in a nominal sense—use the word “self” directly to refer to consciousness.  That is, when they say that “Consciousness is the self in the sense that it takes on the next life,” what we are giving the name is the body, and the collection of the senses.


[3179]
DE YANG MDO KHA CIG LAS SEMS DUL NA BDE BA ‘THOB PAR GSUNGS LA, KHA CIG TU BDAG DUL BAS MTHO RIS THOB PAR GSUNGS PAS SEMS LA BDAG TU ‘JOG CES LUNG DANG,

Now we also see some sutras were it says that—if we are able to restrain the mind—then we will be able to achieve happiness.  In other sutras we see the statement that we can attain the higher rebirths if we are able to restrain the self.


[3180]
PHUNG PO LEN MKHAN NI BDAG YIN LA RNAM SHES KYIS YANG SRID LEN PA’I PHYIR RNAM SHES BDAG TU BZHAG GO ZHES RIGS PA’I SGRUB BYED SMRA’O,,

We also see statements of the supporting logic here: “The one who takes on the parts to a person is the self; and since it is our consciousness which takes on the next rebirth, then we can say that it is consciousness which must be the self.”


[3181]
SLOB DPON ‘DI KUN GZHI MI BZHED PAS LUS LEN PA’I RNAM SHES NI YID KYI RNAM SHES YIN TE, KUN GZHI MI ‘DOD PA GZHAN YANG DE DANG ‘DRA’O,,

Our present master does not accept the concept of a foundation consciousness; as such, the consciousness which takes on a body must be the consciousness of the thoughts.  This would follow in the same way for others as well who do not accept the idea of foundation consciousness.


[3182]
KUN GZHI ‘DOD PAS KUN GZHI RNAM SHES NYID GANG ZAG GI MTSAN GZHIR SMRA’O,,

Those who do accept foundation consciousness would describe this foundation type of consciousness as that thing which is referred to as the “person.”


[3183]
DE YANG LUGS DE DAG GIS NYAN RANG GIS GANG ZAG RDZAS YOD DU MED PAR RTOGS PAR ‘DOD KYANG, RNAM SHES GNYIS PO RDZAS YOD DU MED PAR RTOGS PAR MI ‘DOD PAS,

These particular systems would—moreover—accept the idea that listeners and self-made buddhas are capable of realizing that there is no person who exists in a substantial way.  Nonetheless, they would not agree that these could come to the realization that these two types of consciousness are not something which could exist in a substantial way.


[3184]
GANG ZAG RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS SU MED PAR SMRA BA NI GANG ZAG GI RANG GI LDOG PA NAS ‘DOD PA YIN GYI, GANG ZAG GI MTSAN GZHI RNAM SHES LA DE LTAR ‘DOD PA MIN NO,,

As such, when people assert that the individual is not something which could exist substantially, in a self-standing way, they are referring to the person in the abstract; they would not though agree to this idea that what we refer to as the “person” could be consciousness.



Denying others on the parts

[3185]
GNYIS PA NI,

Here is our second section from above: a denial of the other side’s position on the parts.


	[3186]
[VI.127]
Skandhā ātmā ced atas tad bahutvād
ātmānaḥ syus te’pi bhūyāṃsa evam,
Dravyaṃ cātmā prāpnuyāt tad dṛśaś ca
dravye vṛttau vaiparītyaṃ ca na syāt.

,GAL TE PHUNG PO BDAG NA DE PHYIR DE,
,MANG BAS BDAG DE DAG KYANG MANG BAR ‘GYUR,
,BDAG NI RDZAS SU ‘GYUR ZHING DER LTA BA,
,RDZAS LA ‘JUG PAS PHYIN CI LOG MI ‘GYUR,

		Suppose the five parts
		Were the self.

		In that case then—
		Since these are multiple—

		One would also
		Have multiple selves.

		The self would be
		Something substantial,

		And the one
		That acts to view these
		Engages in substance;

		As such, it is not something
		Which is mistaken.

	
[3187]
GAL TE RANG RGYUD KYI PHUNG PO LNGA BDAG YIN PA’I PHYOGS LTAR NA, DE’I PHYIR PHUNG PO DE MANG BAS GANG ZAG GCIG LA YANG BDAG DE DAG KYANG MANG POR ‘GYUR RO,,

Suppose things were as this other position says it: suppose the five parts to the person taken in by our own being were themselves the self.  In that case then—since these parts to the person are themselves multiple—one single individual would also have multiple selves.


[3188]
GANG GI LTAR NA SEMS BDAG YIN PA DE’I LTAR NA MIG LA SOGS PA’I RNAM PAR SHES PA’I DBYE BAS SAM SKAD CIG RE RE LA, RNAM SHES DU MA SKYE BA DANG ‘GAG PA’I DBYE BAS MANG BA’I PHYIR BDAG KYANG MANG POR ‘GYUR RO,,

In the case that the mind was the self, then given that there are many divisions to the consciousness of the eye and so one—as well as many instants of each of these—then there would be many consciousnesses, with each one split into divisions of starting or stopping.  In this case then again, the self would have to be multiple in number.


[3189]
‘DIR ‘GREL PA LAS, BDAG MANG POR THAL BA PHYOGS SNGA MA GNYIS KYI DANG PO LA [f. 221b] ‘PHEN PA DANG, YANG NA SKYON GZHAN YANG GNYIS KA LA ‘PHEN PAR GSUNGS SO,,

The autocommentary notes that the logical necessity that the self would be multiple is implied by the first of the two previous positions.  We can also say that other problems are implied by both positions.


[3190]
‘DI NI MANG PO DANG NGO BO GCIG PAR ‘DOD PA TZAM LA ‘PHEN DU MI RUNG BAS, BDAG DANG PHUNG PO GNYIS THA DAD GTAN MED GCIG TU ‘DOD PA LA ‘PHEN PA’O,,

These are not implications that would logically hold only with the assertions of being multiple or essentially the same.  As such, these implications would hold with the two of the self and the parts to the person being a single thing where they were absolutely never separate.


[3191]
DE YANG DANG PO NAS GZHAN GYIS DE LTAR KHAS MA BLANGS PAS, NGO BO GCIG PA DANG THA DAD TZAM YIN PA BRDZUN PA LA SKYON MED KYANG, BDAG PHUNG GNYIS BDEN PAR KHAS LEN PA LA NGO BO GCIG NA DBYER MED KYI GCIG TU PHUL NAS, DE’I ‘OG TU BDAG MANG PO DANG PHUNG PO LNGA GCIG TU THAL BA ‘PHANG NGO,,

And the fact is too that the other side would never, from the very start, accept this kind of thing.  Therefore being essentially the same, or simply separate, would not be a problem in the case that things were false.  If though one were to accept that the two of the self and the parts to the person existed in truth, then saying that they were essentially the same would mean that they would have to be an inseparable single thing.  And then subsequent to that you would have to say that the self was multiple, and that the five parts to the person were singular.


[3192]
DE’I TSE ‘JIG RTEN SKYE BA NA GANG ZAG NYAG GCIG SKYE’O ZHES BYA BA’I LUNG LAS NA, PHA ROL POS BDAG MANG POR ‘DOD PA YANG MIN NO,,

We see though references which say that “When someone is born in the everyday world, it is only the one single person who is born.”  It is not then the case that the other side here is asserting that the self is somehow multiple.


[3193]
BDAG NI RDZAS SU ‘GYUR ZHING STE, GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I RDZAS ‘DAS PA LA SOGS PA’I DBYE BAS, THA DAD PAR ‘GYUR BA RNAMS KHO NA LA PHUNG PO NYID DU BRJOD PA’I PHYIR DANG,

As the line here puts it, “The self would be something substantial, and…”  Which is to say, suppose that we do assert the divisions of form and the rest into substance that was past, and so on.  As such, it would be only the separate entitites here that we could refer to as those very parts to the person.


[3194]
DE RNAMS KHO NA LA BDAG TU BSNYAD PA’I PHYIR BDAG RDZAS SU YOD PAR ‘GYUR NA, 

And since it is only those that we could refer to as the “self,” the self would have to be something that existed in a substantial way.  And yet we know from specific references that it’s not that the other side here would agree to the idea that the self existed in a substantial way.


[3195]
DGE SLONG DAG LNGA PO ‘DI DAG NI MING TZAM THA SNYAD TZAM BTAGS PA TZAM STE, GANG ‘DI LTA STE, ‘DAS PA’I DUS DANG MA ‘ONGS PA’I DUS DANG, NAM MKHA’ DANG, MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA DANG, GANG ZAG GO ZHES BYA BA DANG,

First of all, we have this statement from scripture:

O monks, these five exist only in name; they are something labeled, with no more than a term.  And what they are named is things like “the time which has already passed,” or “the time that is yet to come,” or “space,” or “going beyond grief,” or “the person.”


[3196]
DE BZHIN DU,
,JI LTAR YAN LAG TSOGS RNAMS LA,
,BRTEN NAS SHING RTAR BRJOD PA LTAR,
,DE BZHIN PHUNG PO RNAMS BRTEN NAS,
,KUN RDZOB SEMS CAN ZHES BYA’O,
ZHES BYA BA ‘DI LAS NA PHA ROL POS BDAG RDZAS SU ‘DOD PA YANG MA YIN NO,,

In the same way, we see:

	It’s just the same way
	That we refer to something
	As a “wagon,”

	Based upon the
	Collection of its parts.

	That is, we refer
	To a living being,
	In a deceptive way,

	Based upon their heaps.


[3197]
GZHAN YANG PHUNG PO DER LTA BA’I ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA RDZAS LA ‘JUG PA STE RDZAS SU GRUB PA’I YUL CAN YIN PAS, SNGON PO DANG SER PO LA [f. 222a] SOGS PA’I SHES PA LTAR PHYIN CI LOG NYID DU MI ‘GYUR RO,,

We can moreover say that the view of destruction that acts to view these parts to the person engages in substance; which is to say, it is a subject which takes as its object things which exist substantially.  As such, in the sense that it is aware of things like blue and yellow and the like, it is not something which is exclusively mistaken.


[3198]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG LTA SPONG BA NA RIGS ‘DRA RGYUN MA CHAD DU MI ‘BYUNG BA’I TSUL GYIS SPANGS PA MIN PA’AM, SNGO SER SOGS TZAM LA DMIGS PA’I SHES PA LTAR ‘JIG LTA LA DMIGS PA’I ‘DUN PA’I ‘DOD CHAGS SPANGS PA KHO NAS SPONG BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

This means that—when we do eliminate the view of destruction within ourselves—it is not as if we get rid of it in the manner that there is no longer an unbroken flow of matching instances.  Nor is it that we have eliminated it only by eliminating attachment focused upon the view of destruction, as would be the case with an awareness focused only upon blue or yellow or the like.


	[3199]
[VI.128]
Ātmocchedī nirvṛtau syād avaśyaṃ
nāśotpādī nirvṛteḥ prāk kṣaṇeṣu,
Kartur nāśāt tat phalābhāva eva
bhuṃjītānyenārjitaṃ karma cānyaḥ.

,MYA NGAN ‘DAS TSE NGES PAR BDAG CHAD ‘GYUR,
,MYA NGAN ‘DAS SNGON SKAD CIG DAG LA NI,
,SKYE ‘JIG BYED PO MED PAS DE ‘BRAS MED,
,GZHAN GYIS BSAGS LA GZHAN GYIS ZA BAR ‘GYUR,

		When we attain nirvana,
		The self would surely
		Have discontinued.

		In the instants
		Prior to nirvana,
		They would have been
		Going in & out
		Of existence.

		There could be
		No agent involved,
		And so there would be
		No such result.

		What was collected
		By one would be
		Consumed by another.


[3200]
GZHAN YANG RANG GI PHUNG PO BDAG YIN NA KHYOD KYI LTAR NA LHAG MED KYI MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA’I TSE PHUNG PO LNGA CHAR CHAD PAS, NGES PAR BDAG CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Moreover, there’s another issue here.  If the parts to the person that one possesses are the self, then according to you when we attain nirvana without any remainder, then all five parts to the person would have discontinued.  In that case then, the self itself would surely have discontinued as well.


[3201]
DE’I PHYIR MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI CHAD PA’I LTA BAR ‘GYUR TE, KHYED CAG GIS GANG BDAG TU BZUNG BA DE NYID LA RTAG CHAD DU ‘DZIN PA MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI LTA BAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And because of that then, what we have here would become the version of extreme view where we hold that everything has simply discontinued.  And that in turn is because you fellows have taken the position that the tendency to grasp to a self constitutes the extreme view of holding either that things would last forever, or that they have simply come to a complete stop.


[3202]
MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PAR ZHUGS PA’I SNGON GYI SKAD CIG DAG LA NI, PHUNG PO SKAD CIG RE RER SKYE ‘JIG BYED PA LTAR BDAG KYANG SKAD CIG RE RER NGO BO NYID KYIS SO SO BA’I SKYE ‘JIG BYED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

In the instants prior to entering into nirvana, the parts to the person would have been going in & out of existence with each passing moment.  And in that case, the self itself would be similar: in every passing instant, it would be going through discrete startings and stoppings that existed in & of themselves.


[3203]
DE’I PHYIR SKYE BA DRAN PA NA JI LTAR NGA’I LUS ‘DI SNGON BYUNG BAR GYUR TO, ZHES BYA BAR MI ‘DZIN PA DE BZHIN DU, DE’I TSE DE’I DUS NA NGA RGYAL PO NGA LAS NU ZHES BYA BAR GYUR TO, ZHES BYA BA ‘DI YANG GSUNG BAR MI ‘GYUR TE,

Thus then it would be similar to when we recall a past rebirth that we had: it’s not as if we are able to say, “I had a body like this in those days gone by.”  It’s not as if we say to ourselves, “In those days, in that life, I was that king whose name was ‘Nurse from Me’.”


[3204]
DE’I DUS KYI BDAG KYANG LUS LTAR ZHIG PAS, DA LTA MED PA’I PHYIR DANG, TSE ‘DIR SNGAR GYI BDAG LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS THA DAD PA’I BDAG GZHAN SKYES PAR KHAS BLANGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And that’s because you have taken the position that the self that I had in those days gone by would have ended just as the body did—and could no longer exist at present.  And that means you are saying that yet another self would have taken birth here in this life: one which was essentially separate from that previous self.


[3205]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,NYE BAR LEN NYID BDAG MA YIN,
,DE ‘BYUNG BA DANG ‘JIG PA YIN,
,NYE BAR BLANG BA JI LTA BUR,
,NYE BAR LEN PO YIN PAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES DANG,

Wisdom says as well,

What you took on
At your birth, itself,

Is not the self;
For that is something
Which comes about
And comes to an end.

And whatever applies
To what was taken on
Applies as well
To the one who took it.


	[3206]
,GAL TE PHUNG PO BDAG YIN NA,
,SKYE DANG ‘JIG PA CAN DU ‘GYUR,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

We also see:

	If the self
	Were the parts
	To the person,

	Then it would be
	Something that
Went through starting
And stopping too.


[3207]
SKAD [f. 222b] CIG SNGA PHYI BA RNAMS NGO BO NYID KYIS GZHAN YIN NA, DE’I TSE BYED PA PO’I BDAG MED PAS, LAS LA YANG GNAS PA’I RTEN MED PA’I PHYIR LAS KYANG MED PAS, LAS DE’I ‘BRAS BU DANG ‘BREL BA MED PA NYID DU ‘GYUR RO,,

Suppose then that successive moments, previous and subsequent, were other than each other, by their very essence.  In that case, there could be no self to the agent involved; and so there would moreover be no basis for the action itself to remain—which means there would be no action either.  And then there would be absolutely no connection to the result of such an action.


[3208]
GAL TE SKAD CIG MA SNGA MAS BYAS PA’I LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU SKAD CIG MA PHYI MA RNAMS SU LONGS SPYOD PAS SKYON MED DO SNYAM NA,

In response then one might have the thought that “Well, the result of the action taken by something in the previous instant would be experienced by things in the later instants; and so there would be no problem here.”


[3209]
DE’I TSE GZHAN GYIS BSAGS PA’I LAS KYI RNAM PAR SMIN PA GZHAN GYIS LONGS SPYOD PA’I PHYIR, RGYUD GZHAN GYIS BSAGS PA’I ‘BRAS BU LA GZHAN GYIS ZA BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

At that point though the ripening of a karma collected by one entity would we experienced by another; which means that the result of what was collected by a person in one mental stream would be consumed by a person in another.


[3210]
DE LTAR NA LAS BYAS PA CHUD ZOS PA DANG, MA BYAS PA DANG PHRAD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And in that case, it would be possible for a person to commit a karma and see the result simply fade away, without having to be experienced; and one would also meet up with the results of a karma that one had never originally committed.


[3211]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,GAL TE ‘DI NI GZHAN ‘GYUR NA,
,DE MED PAR YANG ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR,
,DE BZHIN DU NI GNAS ‘GYUR ZHING,
,DE MA SHI BAR SKYE BAR ‘GYUR,

Wisdom too puts it this way—

	If this were to become
	Something other,
	Then that would have
	To stop existing.

	We would stay as well
	In the very same way,
	And take a birth
	Without dying first.


	[3212]
,CHAD DANG LAS RNAMS CHUD ZA DANG,
,GZHAN GYIS BYAS PA’I LAS RNAMS NI,
,GZHAN GYIS SO SOR MYONG BA DANG,
,DE LA SOGS PAR THAL BAR ‘GYUR,

Things would simply stop,
And karma would fade away;

And the karmas committed
By one person would be
Experienced by another,
One by one.

These and other such things
Are the implications here.


[3213]
ZHES SNGA PHYI RANG BZHIN GYIS GZHAN YIN NA SNGA MA LA LTOS PA MI RUNG BAS SNGA MA DE MED PAR YANG ‘BYUNG BA DANG, SNGA MA’I BDAG DE DE BZHIN DU GNAS PAS, DER MA SHI BAR ‘DIR SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA SOGS GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that—if what came before and what came after were different from each other, by nature—then it would be wrong to say that the one was relying upon the previous.  And then that would have to occur even in the absence of what had come before.  The self of the previous time would have to remain in the very same manner, which means that a person would, for example, have to take their rebirth without having died first.



Refuting answers on the parts

[3214]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: Refuting the answer, where the other side attempts to deny the problems we’ve raised.


	[3215]
[VI.129]
Na syād doṣaḥ santatis tattva taś ced
ukto doṣaḥ santateḥ prāgvicāre,
Skandhā nātmā nāpi cittaṃ ca tasmād
ito lokasyāntavattvādyabhāvāt.

[VI.129a]
,DE NYID DU RGYUD YOD NA SKYON MED NA,
,SNGAR RNAM DPYAD TSE RGYUD LA NYES BSHAD ZIN,
,DE PHYIR PHUNG PO DANG SEMS BDAG MI RIGS,

		Suppose it is the case
		That there is a stream
		That exists
		In & of itself;

		And so there is 
		No problem here.

		When we did
		Our examination earlier,
		We already explained
		The problems.

		As such, it is
		Illogical that the parts
		To a person,

		Or the mind,
		Are the self.


[3216]
GAL TE SKAD CIG SNGA PHYI DAG GZHAN YIN MOD KYI, DE LTA NA YANG RGYUD GCIG YIN PAS SKYON MED DO ZHE NA,

One may come with the following comment:

It is admittedly the case that those things of the prior and subsequent instants in time are different things from one another; but even then, they represent a single flow.  As such, there is no such problem as the one you have raised here.


[3217]
DE KHO NA NYID DU RGYUN CAN RDZAS THA DAD PA RNAMS LA RGYUD GCIG YOD PAS SKYON MED NA, DE YANG MI ‘THAD DE RANG BZHIN GYIS THA DAD PA RNAMS LA RGYUD GCIG YIN PA LA, SNGAR RNAM PAR DPYAD PA BYAS PA’I TSE NYES PA BSHAD ZIN TE, BYAMS PA NYE SBAS LA BRTEN CHOS RNAMS [f. 223a] NI, ZHES BYA BA DER RO,,

Suppose it is the case that there is no problem here, because things occurring in a stream that exists in & of itself exist as separate substances sharing a single flow.  This idea though must be mistaken, since when we did our examination earlier, we already explained the problems with things that are separate by nature acting in a single flow.  This in fact was back when we spoke about “John leaning on Joe.”


[3218]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,GAL TE LHA LAS MI GZHAN NA,
,DE LTA NA NI MI RTAG ‘GYUR,
,GAL TE LHA MI GZHAN YIN NA,
,RGYUD NI ‘THAD PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

Wisdom also states—

If a worldly deity
Is other than a human,

Then in that case
They must be changing.

If the deity and the human
Are other than each other,

Then it must be incorrect
To say there is a flow.


[3219]
DE’I PHYIR RANG BZHIN GYIS THA DAD PA RNAMS LA RGYUD GCIG PA NYID MI RIGS PAS, LAS MA BYAS PA DANG PHRAD PA DANG BYAS PA CHUD ZOS PA SOGS KYI THAL ‘GYUR LDOG PA MED DO,,

And so it is illogical to speak of a single flow when we are talking about two things that are separate from each other by nature.  As such, you have in no way succeeded in repulsing the ridiculous consequences we raised: that one would meet with the consequences of an action that they had never committed; and that the consequences of actions which one had indeed committed could just fade away on their own—or other ideas of the like.


[3220]
DE’I PHYIR RANG GI PHUNG PO RNAMS DANG RANG GI SEMS RANG GI BDAG NYID DU ‘DOD PA MI RIGS SO,,

As such, it is illogical to cling to your belief that the parts to a person are ones self itself; or that ones mind is ones self.



Support for denying that
the parts constitute the self

[3221]
GNYIS PA NI,

Here then is our second point from before: a presentation of support for saying that the kind of belief presented is incorrect.


	[3221]
[VI.129b]
,’JIG RTEN MTHA’ LDAN LA SOGS MED PHYIR RO,

		And that’s because
		There was none
		About the universe

		Having a beginning
		And an end,
		And so on.		


[3222]
JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I RIGS PAS PHUNG PO DANG SEMS BDAG MIN PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI GZHAN YANG ‘JIG RTEN MTHA’ DANG LDAN PA NYID DANG, LA SOGS PAS MTHA’ DANG MI LDAN PA DANG, GNYIS KA DANG GNYIS KA MA YIN PA DANG, ‘JIG RTEN RTAG PA DANG, MI RTAG PA DANG, GNYIS KA DANG GNYIS KA MA YIN PA DANG, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA GRONGS PHAN CHAD ‘BYUNG BA DANG, MI ‘BYUNG BA DANG, GNYIS KA DANG GNYIS KA MA YIN PAR LTA BA BCU GNYIS DANG, LUS GANG YIN PA DE NYID SROG GO ZHES PA DANG, LUS KYANG GZHAN LA SROG KYANG GZHAN NO ZHES BYA BAR LTA BA GNYIS TE BCU BZHI PO DER LUNG BSTAN DU MED PAR ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR LUNG MA BSTAN GYI LTA BAR SDE PA THAMS CAD KYIS ‘DON PA’I PHYIR PHUNG PO BDAG TU MI RIGS SO,,

It is, further, illogical to say that the parts to the person are the self, because that idea in turn leads to what all the various groups agree are viewpoints on which no opinion was expressed.  And that’s because of the fact that the same logic which we just explained not only clarifies how the parts to the person, and the mind itself, cannot be the self; it also shows how there are fourteen different ideas which we accept as being ones about which no opinion was expressed.  These fourteen are the following; they begin with twelve different possible viewpoints—

(1) The question of whether the universe has a final beginning and an end, and “so on,” which includes the following—

(2) The question of whether the universe has no beginning & end;

(3) The question of whether the universe both has a beginning & end, and has no beginning & end;

(4) The question of whether the universe neither has a beginning & end, nor has no beginning & end;

(5) The question of whether the universe will last forever;

(6) The question of whether the universe will not last forever;

(7) The question of whether the universe will both last forever and not last forever,

(8) The question of whether the universe will neither last forever nor not last forever;

(9) The question of whether the Buddha still exists after he passes away;

(10) The question of whether the Buddha does not still exist after he passes away;

(11) The question of whether the Buddha both exists and does not exist after he passes away;

(12) The question of whether the Buddha neither exists nor does not exist after he passes away.

And then on top of these, we add the two of:

	(13) The viewpoint that it is the body which is the self; and

(14) The viewpoint that the body is one thing, and the self is a different thing.


[3223]
GAL TE ‘JIG RTEN GYI SGRAS PHUNG PO RNAMS ‘DZIN NA, DE’I TSE PHUNG PO RNAMS SKYE ‘JIG BYED PA RANG GI LUGS YIN PA’I PHYIR, ‘JIG RTEN MI RTAG PAR LUNG BSTAN DGOS PA DANG,

If we take the term “the universe” in this context as referring to the parts of the person, then it would be our own position that these parts act to start and stop.  And in that case, the Buddha would indeed have had to express the opinion that the universe would not last forever.


[3224]
MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA’I ‘OG ROL TU KHYED LTAR NA PHUNG PO RNAMS MED PAS ‘JIG RTEN MTHA’ [f. 223b] DANG LDAN PA DANG, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA GRONGS PHAN CHAD YOD PA MIN NO ZHES LUNG BSTAN DGOS PAR YANG ‘GYUR RO,,

And then—still, according to you—subsequent to ones reaching nirvana, there could be no parts to the person; which means that the Buddha should have expressed the opinion that the universe did indeed have a beginning and an end.  And he would have had to opine that the One Thus Gone did not exist after he passed away.


[3225]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN MTHA’ DANG LDAN PA LA SOGS PA LA LAN LUNG STON PA BKAG PA’I PHYIR, PHUNG PO RNAMS BDAG GO ZHES MI RIGS SO,,

As such, it is illogical for you to say that the parts to the person are the self, given that you have denied that it would be possible to express an opinion in response to questions such as whether the universe has a beginning or an end, and so on.


[3226]
DE LA SROG NI BDAG GI RNAM GRANGS SO,,

When they say “life” in this context, by the way, they are considering it a synonym for “the self.”


[3227]
‘JIG RTEN NI BDAG LA BRTZAMS NAS ‘DRI BA’O,,

And questions about the universe are considered to start off from the self itself.


[3228]
DE YANG NANG GI BYED PA’I SKYES BU LA BSAMS NAS ‘DRI NA NI, KHYAD GZHI MA GRUB PAS KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS LUNG BSTAN DU MED DO,,

If these questions about things are intended as starting off from an individual considered as something inner, then—since the basis that we are considering doesn’t exist at all—then it would be impossible to express an opinion about a quality that this basis supposedly possessed.


[3229]
BTAGS PA TZAM GYI BDAG GI SGO NAS LUNG BSTAN NA NI, DE’I TSE ‘DRI BA PO DE RNAMS DE ‘DRA BA’I BDAG MED RTOGS PA’I SKAL BA DANG MI LDAN PAS DE YANG LUNG BSTAN DU MED DO,,

And suppose, on the other hand, that you are talking about expressing an opinion concerning a self that exists only as something imputed.  In that case, we would have to say that the people asking the question did not have enough good karma to realize that there was no such self.  As such then—again—there could be no expressing an opinion.



Other problems with parts as the self

[3230]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third section from before: a presentation of other problems with saying that the parts to the person are the self.


	[3231]
[VI.130]
Ātmābhāvaṃ paśyato yoginaś ca
bhāvābhāvaḥ syādavaśyaṃ tadā te,
Nityātmā cet kṣipyate te tadānīṃ
skandhāś cittaṃ vā bhaven nāta ātmā.

,KHYOD KYI RNAL ‘BYOR BDAG MED MTHONG BA LA,
,DE TSE NGES PAR DNGOS RNAMS MED PAR ‘GYUR,
,RTAG BDAG SPANGS NA DE TSE DE YI PHYIR,
,KHYOD KYI SEMS SAM PHUNG PO BDAG MI ‘GYUR,

		When your deep
		Practitioner sees
		That things have no
		Self-nature,

		Then at that point
		Those entities
		Have no existence.

		Suppose we eliminate
		An unchanging self;

		At that point,
		As such,
		Your mind,
		And parts to
		The person,

		Could never be
		The self.


[3232]
SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE, GAL TE KHYOD KYI LTAR NA, RNAL ‘BYOR PAS BDAG MED PA MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA’I DUS SU, CHOS THAMS CAD NI BDAG MED PA’O ZHES BDAG MED PA’I RNAM PAR SDUG BSNGAL GYI BDEN PA MTHONG BA

There are still other problems here.  If things are the way you say they are, then at the point when a deep practitioner sees—directly—that things have no self-nature, then they have seen that aspect of the truth of suffering called “no self”: the point at which we say “nothing in the universe has any nature of its own.”


[3233]
DE’I TSE, NGES PAR PHUNG PO’I DNGOS PO RNAMS MED PAR MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR BAS BDAG MED PA MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR TE, PHUNG PO DANG SEMS BDAG YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

At that point, then definitely one sees that those entities known as the parts to the person have no existence—which is to say, they see the lack of a self-nature.  And that’s because the parts to the person, and the mind, are the self.


[3234]
DE LTAR ‘DOD PA YANG MA YIN PAS DE’I PHYIR PHUNG PO RNAMS BDAG MA YIN NO,,

And since this itself is again not something that we could agree to, the parts to the person are not the self.


[3235]
‘O NA PHUNG PO BDAG TU MI ‘DOD PA’I LUGS LA YANG, GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA’I TSE, BDAG GI MTSAN GZHIR ‘JOG PA’I GANG ZAG THAMS CAD MED PAR MTHONG DGOS PAR ‘GYUR TE, RGYU MTSAN MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

One may come then with the following question:

Even according to the system where they disagree that the parts to the person are the self, something is supposed to happen when you see, directly, the fact that there is no self-nature to the person.  That is, you would have at this point to see that none of the persons normally cited as the defining example of the self even existed; for the logic here is equivalent.


[3236]
‘DI LA RIGS PA PHRA MO MA RTOGS NA LAN MI THEBS PAS BSHAD PAR BYA STE, PHA ROL POS PHUNG PO DANG SEMS BDAG TU ‘DOD PA NI BDAG [f. 224a] DANG GANG ZAG RNAMS THA SNYAD KYI DBANG GIS BZHAG PA TZAM DU MA RTOGS PAR BTAGS DON BTZAL NAS BZHAG PA YIN LA, DE LTAR NA PHUNG PO DANG SEMS BDAG YIN PA DE RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I BDAG TU ‘GYUR LA,

There is some subtle reasoning here that—if you cannot grasp it—will prevent you from giving a proper answer here; so we’d better explain it.  When the other side here holds that the parts to the person, or the mind, are the self, they are at the same time failing to realize that both the self and the person are things that are established only by force of terms.  And then on this basis they are looking for what it is that we gave the name, and making a decision about what it should be.  And then in this way the parts to the person and the mind that are supposed to be the self turn into a self that could exist through some essential nature of its own.


[3237]
BDAG MED PAR MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA’I TSE BDAG DE RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MED PAR RTOGS DGOS PAS, PHA ROL PO LA PHUNG PO DANG SEMS KYI DNGOS PO BDAG YIN PA DE THAMS CAD MED PAR MTHONG DGOS PA’I SKYON ‘JUG LA,

At that point when we see, directly, how there is no self, then we should be coming to a realization of how no such self could ever exist, in any way at all.  As such, our opponent here is incurring the logical fault of saying that one would have to see that none of these entities which were supposed to be the self—the parts to the person and the mind—even existed.


[3238]
MING DU BTAGS PA TZAM GYIS ‘JOG GI ,BTAGS DON BTZAL NAS ‘JOG PAR MI ‘DOD PA’I LUGS LA SKYON DE RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The system though which says that all these things are established only in name—and which denies that, when you go looking for what it is you gave the name, you could ever find something—incurs none of these problems, in any manner at all.


[3239]
CI STE GANG GI TSE LAS DANG ‘BRAS BU ‘BREL BA’I DUS SU BDAG GI SGRA SBYOR BA DE’I TSE, PHUNG PO LAS DON GZHAN PA’I BDAG MI SRID PA’I PHYIR, PHUNG PO RNAMS KHO NA LA ‘JUG LA, GANG GI TSE BDAG MED PAR MTHONG BA DE’I TSE NI MU STEGS BYED GZHAN GYIS KUN BTAGS PA NANG GI BYED PA’I SKYES BU NYID LA ‘JUG STE,

And now suppose someone comes with the following thought—

At that point when we talk about the connection between karma and its conseuqences, we apply the word “self.”  The term at this point can only apply to the parts of the person, since it is impossible for there to be any self which would be a separate thing from the parts to the person.  When we get to the point then where we see that there is no self, this can only apply to an inner being of the kind which has been concocted by those other, River Schools.


[3240]
DE’I PHYIR BDAG MED PAR MTHONG BA’I DUS SU YANG NANG GI BYED PA’I SKYES BU DANG BRAL BA ‘DU BYED TZAM MTHONG BA YIN LA, DE LA NI PHUNG SOGS KYI DNGOS PO RNAMS MI MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR BA’I SKYON MED DO SNYAM NA,

As such, then, at that point in time when we see that there is no self, all that we are really seeing is that factor that things lack any inner being.  Thus then one would incur none of the faults of not seeing entities such as the parts to the person or the like.


[3241]
GAL TE BDAG MED MTHONG BA’I DUS SU RTAG PA’I BDAG NANG GI BYED PA’I SKYES BU SPONG BA STE MED PAR MTHONG BA YIN NA NI, DE LTAR ‘DOD PA DE’I TSE SKABS GZHAN DU BDAG GI SGRA’I DON GZHAN LA DRANG DU MI RUNG BA DE’I PHYIR, KHYOD KYI PHUNG PO DANG SEMS BDAG TU MI ‘GYUR LA, DE LTA NA NI RANG PHYOGS NYAMS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Suppose then that it is the case that—when we perceive that there is no self—we eliminate the idea of an inner being which was some kind of unchanging self.  At that point where we take this kind of position, it becomes inappropriate for us—in other contexts—to interpret the word “self” as applying to other entities.  As such, then, your parts to the person, and your mind, could never be the self; and in such manner, your own position would be undermined.


[3242]
CI STE LAS ‘BRAS KYI [f. 224b] ‘BREL BA’I SKABS DE LTA BU’I YUL LA NI, MU STEGS KYI BDAG GI SGRA ‘DI ‘JUG PAR MI ‘DOD DE, DE’I PHYIR RANG GI PHYOGS NYAMS PA’I SKYON MED DO SNYAM NA,

One may return then with the following idea:

Well, we would deny that—in the context of the connection between karma and its consequences—this particular type of object could be referred to with the word “self” as it is used by the River Schools.  As such, there is no problem here that could draw into question our position.


[3243]
DE YANG MI RIGS TE, ‘DIR NI NANG GI BYED PA’I SKYES BU BDAG YIN LA, GZHAN DU LAS ‘BRAS KYI SKABS SU NI PHUNG PO RNAMS YIN NO ZHES ‘DOD DGUR SPYOD PA LA RIGS PA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

That itself though is incorrect; for it is illogical for you to take a thousand different positions here, according to your own fancy, saying that this inner being is the self, but that in certain other contexts—such as the point at which we’re talking about karma & its consequences—the self happens to be the parts to the person.


[3244]
GAL TE LAS ‘BRAS KYI SKABS SU NANG GI BYED PA’I SKYES BU LAS BYED PA PO DANG ‘BRAS BU MYONG BA POR MI SRID PA’I PHYIR RO SNYAM NA,

In response one may have another thought:

But at the point where we’re talking about karma & its consequences, it would be impossible for there to be any agent which committed the karma, and any individual who experienced the result of that karma, other than this inner being.


[3245]
PHUNG PO RNAMS LA YANG BDAG GI SGRA ‘DI ‘JUG PA MED DE {%DO} ZHES SNGAR BSHAD ZIN TO,,

But we have already explained this issue earlier, at the point where we said that the word “self” cannot apply to the parts of the person either.


[3246]
DE’I PHYIR GAL TE CHOS THAMS CAD NI BDAG MED PA’O ZHES BYA BA ‘DIR BDAG GI SGRA PHUNG PO RNAMS LA ‘JUG PAR MI ‘DOD NA, GZHAN LAS ‘BRAS KYI SKABS SU YANG MI ‘DOD PAR BYA DGOS SO,,

As such, suppose we disagree that the word “self” in the expression “nothing in the universe has any self” could apply to the parts of the person.  In that case, we would have to disagree in the same way that it could apply in the context of karma & its consequences.


[3247]
CI STE LAS ‘BRAS KYI SKABS SU BDAG GI SGRA PHUNG PO LA ‘JUG PAR ‘DOD NA NI, CHOS THAMS CAD BDAG MED DO ZHES PA ‘DIR YANG BDAG GI SGRA PHUNG PO LA ‘DOD PAR BYA DGOS SO,,

And suppose that you did agree that the word “self” could apply to the parts of the person, in the context of karma & its consequences.  In that case, you would have to agree that the word “self” referred to the parts of the person as well here in the context of saying that “nothing in the universe has any self.”


	[3248]
[VI.131]
Rūpādīnāṃ naiva tattvaṃ gataṃ syād
ātmābhāvaṃ paśyato yoginas te,
Rāgādīnāṃ rūpam ālambya vṛtteḥ
syād utpattis tat svarūpāvibodhāt.

,KHYOD KYI RNAL ‘BYOR BDAG MED MTHONG BA YIS,
,GZUGS SOGS DE NYID RTOGS PAR MI ‘GYUR ZHING,
,GZUGS LA DMIGS NAS ‘JUG PHYIR ‘DOD CHAGS SOGS,
,SKYE ‘GYUR DE YI NGO BO RTOGS MED PHYIR,

		When your
		Deep practitioner
		Sees that there
		Is no self,

		They must not
		Realize the nature
		Of form and the rest.

		They would still be
		Engaging in form
		While perceiving it,

		And subject to
		The arisal of
		Desire and the like;

		Because they had
		Not yet realized
		The essential nature.


[3249]
SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE, KHYOD KYI LTAR NA RNAL ‘BYOR PAS BDAG MED PA MNGON SUM DU MTHONG BA YIS, GZUGS SOGS KYI DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR MI ‘GYUR TE, DES DE’I TSE MU STEGS KYIS KUN BTAGS PA’I RTAG PA’I BDAG TZAM ZHIG MED PAR MTHONG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

And there’s yet another problem here.  According to your view, when a deep practitioner sees, directly, that there is no self, they must not realize the true nature of form and the rest.  And that’s because—at this point—they would only have seen that the self concocted by the River Schools didn’t exist.


[3250]
DE’I PHYIR GZUGS LA SOGS PA LA BDEN PAR DMIGS NAS ‘JUG PA’I PHYIR, GZUGS SOGS KYI YUL CAN GYI ‘DOD CHAGS SOGS DA DUNG YANG SKYE BAR ‘GYUR TE, GZUGS LA SOGS PA DE YI NGO BO STE YIN LUGS RTOGS PA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As such, they would still be engaging in things like form and the rest while perceiving them, at the same time, as existing in truth.  And then they would still be subject to the arisal of desire and the like, with the subject state of mind holding to objects such as form and such.  And this would be true because they had not yet realized the essential nature of this form and the rest; which is to say, the way they really were.


[3251]
DPER NA ME TOG GI ZE’U ’BRU LA KHU BYUG YOD CES PA TZAM GYIS ZE’U ‘BRU’I MNGAR PO NYID [f. 225a] RANG GIS MA MYANGS PAR, DE’I MNGAR PO DMIGS PA MA YIN PA

You can go around saying, for example, that there are natural sugars in the anthers of a flower; but just saying that doesn’t mean that you have yourself experienced the real sweetness of those anthers.  And then we would say that the sweetness had still not been perceived.


[3252]
DE BZHIN DU RNAL ‘BYOR PAS PHUNG PO’I CHOS RNAMS RTAG PA’I BDAG DANG BRAL BAR MTHONG BA TZAM YOD DU CHUG KYANG, GZUGS SOGS DE’I RANG BZHIN SNGAR MA SHES PA PHYIS RTOGS PA CI YANG MI DMIGS SO,,

In the same way, we can say that there is a deep practitioner who has seen nothing more than the fact that these entities—the parts to the person—are devoid of any unchanging self; but at the same time they might not have later on perceived, in any way at all, some nature of the form and the rest that they had not understood previously.


[3253]
YANG ZE’U ‘BRU LA KHU BYUG MED PA TZAM GYIS ZE’U ‘BRU’I RO MNGAR PO MYANGS BZHIN DU RO DE MA DMIGS PA MA YIN ZHING, DER GTOGS PA’I MNGON ZHEN SPONG MI NUS PA BZHIN DU,

That is, one is saying further that we can be in the very act of experiencing the sweet taste of anthers and not be a person who is failing to perceive the taste there, just because there is no natural sugar on the anthers; and have thus been unable to give up the craving implied there.


[3254]
GZUGS SOGS KYI RANG GI NGO BO BDEN PAR DMIGS PAS RTAG PA’I BDAG MED PAR MTHONG BA LA, GZUGS SOGS LA DMIGS PA’I CHAGS SOGS SPONG BA’I RGYU CI ZHIG ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR RO,,

We can be perceiving some essence or reality in things like form and the like, and then see how nothing has any self which is unchanging; how then though could you say that there was some cause here that would help someone eliminate attachment and such focused on form and the like?  There could not be.


[3255]
RTAG PA’I BDAG MED PAR MTHONG BAS GZUGS SOGS KYI YUL CAN GYI CHAGS SOGS SPONG BAR ‘GYUR BA, GANG ZAG SU YANG NANG GI BYED PA’I SKYES BU BDEN SNYAM NAS BDE BA MYONG ‘GYUR GYI YUL STEN PAR MI BYED LA, NANG RTAG BDE SDUG BSNGAL BAR DOGS NAS MI ‘DOD PA’I YUL DANG PHRAD PA SPONG BAR YANG MI BYED DO,,

When we see that there is no unchanging self, subject states of mind holding to form and the like are able to eliminate craving and such.  Any person at all who thinks that some inner being though is real will not be able to partake themselves of an object which is going to cause an experience of happiness.  And if we have some suspicion that an inside which is unchanging could be happy or sad, we will never be able to give up meeting with objects that we didn’t want to meet with.


[3256]
DE’I PHYIR CHAGS SOGS SPONG BA’I RGYU MED PAS ‘KHOR BA LAS MI GROL TE, PHYI ROL PA BZHIN NO SNYAM PA’O,,

What I think then is that if we lack the cause that will help us eliminate craving and the rest, we will never be able to liberate ourselves from the circle of pain—in which case we would end up like the non-Buddhists.



Sutra on what we deny

[3257]
BZHI PA LA LNGA, BDAG TU GANG LTA BA THAMS CAD PHUNG PO KHO NA LA LTA PAR GSUNGS PA’I DON BSHAD PA, MDO GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS PHUNG PO TSOGS TZAM BDAG MIN PAR BSHAD PA, PHUNG PO TSOGS PA TZAM GYI DBYIBS KYI BKOD PA BDAG YIN PA DGAG PA, PHUNG PO TSOGS TZAM BDAG TU ‘DOD PA LA GNOD BYED GZHAN BSTAN PA, THUB PAS BDAG DE KHAMS DRUG LA SOGS PA [f. 225b] LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PAR GSUNGS PA’O,,

Which brings us to our fourth part from above: an explanation of the actual intent behind statements that the parts to the person are the self, and so on.  We’ll cover this topic in five different sections:

1) An explanation of the statement that all cases of viewing a self are viewing nothing but the parts to the person;

2) Relying on other sutras to explain how the simple collection of the parts to the person cannot be a self;

3) A denial that the outline of the simple collection of the parts to the person could be a self;

4) A demonstration of other problems with the position that the simple collection of the parts to the person could be a self; and

5) A description of how the Able Ones have stated that the self is merely something labeled upon the basis of things like the six elements.


[3258]
DANG PO LA GSUM, LUNG GI DGONGS PA DGAG BYA GCOD PA’I DGAG PHYOGS NAS YIN PAR BSTAN PA, SGRUB PHYOGS NAS YIN DU CHUG KYANG PHUNG PO BDAG TU STON PA MIN PA, DE DAG LA GZHAN GYI RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these five sections has three parts of its own: (1) a demonstration that the intent of the scriptural reference is meant in a negative connotation, where we are eliminating what we deny; (2) how this reference is not saying that the parts to the person are a self, even if we allow that the reference was meant in a positive sense; and (3) refuting additional argument on these points.  Here then is the first of these.


	[3259]
[VI.132]
Skandhā ātmetyuktavān yena śāstā
skandhā evātmeti tasmān mataś cet,
Skandhebhyo’nyasyātmano’sau niṣedho
rūpaṃ nātmetyādisūtrāntarokteḥ.

,GANG PHYIR STON PAS PHUNG PO BDAG GO ZHES,
,GSUNGS PA DE PHYIR PHUNG PO BDAG ‘DOD NA,
,DE NI PHUNG LAS GZHAN BDAG ‘GOG PA STE,
,GZUGS BDAG MIN SOGS MDO GZHAN GSUNGS PHYIR RO,

		This is because
		Of statements
		By the Teacher:

		Suppose you assert
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are a self,

		Because of statements
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are the self.

		That is to deny
		A self different
		From the parts
		To the person.

		Other sutras express
		That form
		Is not the self,
		And so on.


[3260]
CI STE KHO BO CAG LUNG TSAD MAR BYED PA LA RTOG GE’I TSAD MAS GNOD PA MA YIN LA, LUNG GIS KYANG PHUNG PO KHO NA BDAG TU STON PAR BYED DE,

Well now, we for our part would say that the valid perceptions of logicians are not something which could ever draw into question the holy writ, which must be taken as valid.  And this writ teaches that it is nothing but the parts to the person which constitute the self.


[3261]
GANG GI PHYIR STON PAS DGE SLONG DAG DGE SBYONG NGAM BRAM ZE GANG SU DAG CIG BDAG GO SNYAM DU YANG DAG PAR RJES SU LTA BA DE DAG NI, NYE BAR LEN PA’I PHUNG PO LNGA PO ‘DI DAG KHO NA LA YANG DAG PAR RJES SU LTA’O, ZHES GSUNGS PAS

And this in turn is because the Teacher has made the statement,

Consider now any monk or practitioner or Brahmin who entertains the opinion that something is the self.  These types of people can only be considering, in this case, those five parts to the person that have been taken on.


[3262]
PHUNG PO BDAG GO ZHES GSUNGS PA DE’I PHYIR PHUNG PO BDAG TU ‘DOD NA, MDO DE NI PHUNG PO RNAMS BDAG TU STON PA MA YIN NO,,

Suppose thus that you assert that the parts to the person are a self, because of statements that the parts to the person are the self.  The fact though is that that sutra is not meant to indicate that these parts are a self.


[3263]
‘O NA CI ZHE NA, STON PA’I DGONGS PA NI PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO GZHAN PA’I BDAG BDAG TU LTA BA’I DMIGS PAR ‘DOD PA NI, KHO NA LA ZHES PA’I NGES BZUNG GIS ‘GOG PA STE,

“Well then,” one may ask.  “What then does that statement refer to?”  What the Teacher has in mind here is to express the opinion that—when someone accepts a self which is essentially different from the parts to the person as being what the view of a self focuses upon—we are to deny this idea with that specification of “only.”


[3264]
KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA LA LTOS NAS MU STEGS KYI GZHUNG DGAG PA’I PHYIR DANG, KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PAR YOD PA’I BDAG PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And this is because—relative to deceptive reality—we deny the major texts of the River Schools; and because we teach that the idea of a self which exists in deceptive reality is mistaken.


[3265]
YANG ‘DI PHUNG PO RNAMS LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BDAG ‘GOG PA YIN PAR GANG LAS SHES SHE NA,

“How is it,” you may ask, “that we are to understand that this is a denial of a self which is essentially distinct from the parts to the person?”


[3266]
MDO GZHAN LAS GZUGS BDAG MIN NO ZHES SOGS KYIS GZUGS SOGS RNAMS BDAG YIN PA BKAG PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This is due to the fact that—in other sutras—the understanding was expressed that “form is not the self”; and so on.  Which is to say, it was denied that form and the like could be the self.


	[3267]
[VI.133]
Rūpaṃ nātmā vedanā no na saṃjñā
no saṃskārā nāpi vijñānam uktam,
Sūtre’nyasmin yena tasmān na hīṣṭaḥ
skandhā evātmeti sūtropadeśaḥ.

,GANG PHYIR GZUGS TSOR BDAG MIN PA ‘DU SHES KYANG,
,MA YIN ‘DU BYED RNAMS MIN RNAM SHES KYANG,
,MIN PAR MDO GZHAN LAS GSUNGS DE YI PHYIR,
,MDOR BSTAN PHUNG PO BDAG CES BZHED MA YIN,

		This is because—
		In other sutras—
		It is stated that

		Neither form
		Nor feelings
		Are the self;

		Nor is
		Discrimination;
		Nor are
		The other factors;
		Nor is consciousness.

		As such,
		The statement
		In sutra is not
		An assertion
		
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are the self.


[3268]
MDO GZHAN LAS BKAG PA DE JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

“How then,” one may ask, “is the denial made in other sutras?”


[3269]
GANG GI PHYIR GZUGS DANG TSOR BA BDAG MIN PA DANG, ‘DU SHES KYANG BDAG MA YIN PA DANG, ‘DU BYED RNAMS KYANG BDAG MIN PA DANG, RNAM SHES KYANG BDAG MIN PAR MDO [f. 226a] GZHAN LAS GSUNGS PA

This is the case because—in other sutras—it is stated that neither form nor feelings are the self; nor is discrimination the self; nor are the other factors the self; nor is consciousness the self.


[3270]
DE YI PHYIR NYE BAR LEN PA’I PHUNG PO LNGA PO ‘DI DAG KHO NA LA BDAG GO SNYAM DU YANG DAG PAR RJES SU LTA’O ZHES MDOR BSTAN PA ‘DI LAS NI, PHUNG PO RNAMS BDAG GO ZHES BZHED PA MA YIN GYI, PHUNG PO RNAMS LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BDAG ‘DOD PA KHO NA’I TSIG GIS BKAG PA KHO NAR NGES SO,,

As such, we can say the following about the statement, in sutra, that “One should have this view of things: one should consider the five parts to the person that we have taken on, alone, as being the self.”  This is not an assertion that the parts to the person are the self; rather, this should definitely only be considered an expression of denial that there could be a self that was essentially separate from the parts to the person.


[3271]
GAL TE MDO DES KHO NA LA LTA ZHES PAS BDAG DON GZHAN BKAG MOD KYANG, PHUNG PO ‘DI KHO NA LA LTA’O ZHES PHUNG PO LNGA LA LTA BAR GSUNGS PAS, PHUNG PO RNAMS BDAG LTA’I DMIGS PAR GSAL BAR STON PAS, MDO’I DGONGS PA PHUNG PO BDAG LTA’I DMIGS PA YIN NO SNYAM NA,

Suppose someone thinks to themselves as follows:

It’s admittedly the case that—when this sutra says “can only be”—it is denying that the self could be some other entity.  But then there is the statement that “they can only be considering the parts to the person”—saying that they consider those five parts to the person.  This is clearly a pronouncement that the parts to the person are what the view of a self focuses upon.  As such, the intent of the sutra is to say that the parts to the person are what the view of a self focuses upon.


[3272]
DE LTA YIN NA MDO GZHAN LAS PHUNG PO LNGA BDAG MA YIN PAR GSUNGS PA DANG ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR TE, ‘JIG LTA LHAN SKYES NGAR ‘DZIN GYI DMIGS RNAM GNYIS KYI NANG NAS DMIGS PA YIN NA BDAG YIN DGOS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

If this though were the case, it would contradict the statement that we find in other sutras where they say that the five parts to the person are not the self.  And that’s because if—from among the two possible objects of focus of the tendency to grasp to “me”—we are talking about the object of the inborn view of destruction, it must be the self.


[3273]
DE LTAR GSUNGS PA’I MDO PHYI MA’I DON LA GNOD PA MED LA, BZLOG DON LA GNOD PA SNGAR MANG DU BSHAD CING, DA DUNG YANG ‘CHAD PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR, MDO SNGA MAS PHUNG PO RNAMS ‘JIG LTA’I DMIGS PAR STON PA MIN NO,,

There is no problem if we are talking about the meaning of the latter of the sutras which makes this kind of statement; and we have previously explained many problems with taking this to mean the opposite.  We will, in addition, speak additionally on this point.  As such we can say that the preceding statement from sutra is not meant to indicate that the parts to the person are the object of focus for the view of destruction.


[3274]
DE’I PHYIR PHUNG PO LA LTA’O ZHES PAS NI PHUNG PO LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG DMIGS PAR STON PAR GSAL TE, PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA DANG PHUNG PO NYID BDAG TU ‘DZIN PA’I DMIGS PA YIN PA KHEGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As such, it’s clear that the statement that “it is focused on the parts to the person” is meant to refer to focusing on the self which is labeled, based on these parts.  And that’s because it’s denying that something essentially different from the parts to the person, or these parts themselves, could be the object of focus for the tendency to grasp to a self.


[3275]
MDO GANG LAS GZUGS SOGS RNAMS KYANG BDAG YIN PA BKAG PA DE LAS NI, BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG ‘JIG LTA’I DMIGS PA ‘DIS PHUNG PO LEN PA’I PHUNG PO’I NYE BAR LEN PA CAN RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA BKAG PAR RIG PAR BYA STE, [f. 226b] GZUGS SOGS BDAG MIN PAR GSUNGS PA DE NI DE KHO NA NYID LA SEMS PA’I SKABS YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

There are other sutras in which it is also denied that form and the rest could be the self; and from this we should understand that the self as labeled in dependence—what it is that the view of destruction focuses upon—serves to deny the idea that the one it is that takes on the parts to the person as these parts are taken could exist through any nature of its own.  That is, statements that form and the rest are not the self are made in the context of considering the topic of suchness.


[3276]
DE LTAR NYE BAR LEN PA PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MA DMIGS NA, BDAG DE’I NYE BAR BLANG BAR BYA BA PHUNG PO YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MA YIN NO, ZHES GZUGS SOGS LA YANG BDEN PAR ZHEN PA’I ‘DOD CHAGS DANG BRAL BA ‘THAD PA NYID DO,,

And so what we have here is the statement, “Suppose then that the one who does take these things on could not be someone who existed through some nature of their own.  We would have to say in that case that what they did take on—the parts to the person—could   never be entities that existed through some nature of their own either.”  In that case then it would be perfectly appropriate to say that we were free from the desire which is so hungry to believe that form and the rest are real.


[3277]
MDO SDE PHAN TSUN GYI GUNG LEGS PAR BSGRIGS NAS PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA DANG, PHUNG PO RNAMS BDAG ‘DZIN GYI DMIGS PA YIN PA BKAG NAS,

If we look at how these sutra references support each other as sources, we can see that the idea that the self could be something essentially separate from the parts to the person, or that these parts could be the object of focus for the tendency to believe in a self, are both denied.


[3278]
BDAG PHUNG PO LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA MING GI THA SNYAD KYI DBANG GIS BZHAG PA TZAM GYI GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED KYI ‘JOG TSUL THUN MONG MA YIN PA,

This method of describing the lack of a self to the person—where we describe the self as no more than something established through the power of terms, names labeled on the basis of the parts to the person—is truly unique.


[3279]
RANG GI SDE PA GONG ‘OG GI MKHAS PA MDO’I DGONGS PA ‘GREL BA DU MAS LEGS PAR ‘BAD KYANG GSAL BAR MTHON PA’I MDO’I DGONGS PA, LUNG RIGS PHYIN CI MA LOG PA’I LAM NAS BTON PA DANG,

The great masters of both the higher & lower schools of thought in our own system have made noble efforts to clarify the true intent of these sutras in a great many commentaries that they have composed.  They have thus been able to draw out, with clarity, the sutras’ intended meaning, extracting it by using the path of faultless reasoning and scriptural authority.


[3280]
DE LA BRTEN NAS CHOS GZHAN RNAMS KYANG DE DANG ‘JOG TSUL KHYAD MED PA’I CHOS KYI BDAG MED GSAL BAR BSTAN NAS,

Based on this work, they have gone on to elucidate the meaning of the lack of a self to things in general, establishing as well how these additional entities are to be described in a manner which in no way differs from that just described.


[3281]
SANGS RGYAS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYI DGONGS PA SHIN TU PHRA BA’I GNAS RNAMS RJEN CHER DU STON PA’I MKHAS PA’I DBANG PO’I BZHED PA THUN MONG MA YIN PA ‘DI RNAMS LEGS PAR SHES PA LA ‘BAD PAR GYIS SHIG

Thus then are they lords among masters, who have taken this extremely subtle intent of the Buddha, the Conqueror, and laid it out completely bare for us.  And so I beg you to make massive efforts to learn, deeply, the truly unique positions of these thinkers.



Sutra never said
the parts were the self

[3282]
,GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second part from above, where we show how these scriptural references are not saying that the parts to the person are a self, even if we allow that they were meant in a positive sense.


[3283]
GAL TE NYE BAR LEN PA’I PHUNG PO LNGA PO ‘DI DAG KHO NA LA LTA’O ZHES PA ‘DI NI, SGRUB PHYOGS KYI SGO NAS PHUNG PO BDAG TU STON PA YIN KYANG, PHUNG PO RE RE NAS BDAG TU STON PA MIN NO,,

What then about statements that say, “It can only be considering the five parts to the person that we have taken on”?  This is expressing the point positively, describing the parts to the person as the self; but it is not saying that each separate part to the person is the self.


	[3284]
[VI.134]
Skandhā ātmetyucyamāne samūhaḥ
skandhānāṃ syān naiva tu skandha rūpaḥ,
No nāthatvaṃ no damaḥ sākṣitā vā
tasyāsattvāt syād ato no samūhaḥ.

,PHUNG PO BDAG CES BRJOD TSE PHUNG RNAMS KYI,
,TSOGS PA YIN GYI PHUNG PO’I NGO BO MIN,
,MGON MIN ‘DUL BA’AM DBANG PO NYID KYANG MIN,
,DE MED PHYIR DE TSOGS PA MA YIN NO,

		When it states
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are the self,

		It’s the collection
		Of the parts
		To the person.

		It is not though
		That the essence
		Of the parts is.

		It could not be
		The savior,
		Or the trainer,
		Or the absolute lord.

		Since that
		Would not exist,
		This could not be
		The collection.


[3285]
‘O NA CI ZHE NA,

“Well then,” you may ask, “just what is it saying?”


[3286]
‘DI LTAR PHUNG PO BDAG GO ZHES BRJOD PA’I TSE, PHUNG PO RNAMS KYI TSOGS PA BDAG TU BRJOD PA YIN GYI, PHUNG PO RNAMS KYI NGO BO STE RE RE BA BDAG TU STON PA MIN [f. 227a] TE,

When it states in this way that the parts to the person are the self, what it’s saying is that the collection of the parts to the person is the self.  It is not though meant to indicate that the essence of the parts to the person—which is to say, these parts taken individually—are the self.


[3287]
DPER NA SHING RNAMS NI NAGS TSAL LO ZHES BRJOD PA NA, SHING GI TSOGS PA NAGS TSAL YIN GYI, SHING RE RE BA NAGS SU ‘GYUR BAS SHING GI NGO BOR RE {%BO RE RE} BA NAGS SU BRJOD PA MIN PA BZHIN NO, ZHES GZHAN LA GRUB PA DPER BRJOD PA’O,,

Think for example when we use the expression “the forest of the trees.”  It’s the collection of the trees which is the forest; it is not though the case that each separate tree represents the forest, and that we are then referring to the essential nature of each tree and calling it a forest.  All this then is being used as an example meant to apply to other things.


[3288]
GAL TE TSOGS PA BDAG YIN PA ‘DOD DO ZHE NA,

And suppose someone comes and says that they agree that the collection of the parts is the self.


[3289]
DE LTA NA BDAG NI MGON DANG ‘DUL BA’AM DBANG PO NYID DU GSUNGS LA, KHYED LTAR NA TSOGS PA RKYANG PA DE MGON MIN ZHING, ‘DUL BA’AM DBANG PO NYID KYANG MIN TE, TSOGS PA TZAM DE NI RDZAS SU MED PA’I PHYIR NA, BDAG DE PHUNG PO’I TSOGS PA TZAM MA YIN NO,,

Thus it is then that the “self” has been described as the “savior,” or the “trainer,” or the “absolute lord.”  According to your view though the simple collection here could not be the savior, or else the trainer, or the absolute lord.  And that’s because—since that simple collection would not exist in a substantial way—this self could not be the simple collection of the parts to the person.


[3290]
BDAG MGON LA SOGS PAR GSUNGS TSUL NI, MDO LAS,
,BDAG NYID BDAG GI MGON YIN TE,
,BDAG NYID BDAG GI DGRA YANG YIN,
,LEGS DANG NGAN PA BYAS PA LA,
,BDAG NYID BDAG GI DBANG PO YIN,

How is it that the self was described as the savior and so on?  Sutra puts it this way:

	You yourself
	Are your own savior;

	And you yourself
	Are your own foe.

	You yourself
	Are the master of yourself,
	Who does you well,
	Or does you harm.


[3291]
ZHES BYA BA DE LAS MGON NYID DANG, DBANG PO NYID DU GSUNGS LA,

“This then is the type of source for referring to the one & only savior; and the one & only lord.”


	[3292]
,BDAG NYID LEGS PAR DUL BAS NI,
,MKHAS PAS MTHO RIS THOB PAR ‘GYUR, 
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And we also see—

	The wise attain
	To the higher rebirths

	By succeeding in taming
	Themselves themselves.



Additional argument on these points

[3293]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third part here, refuting additional argument on the preceding points.


[3294]
CI STE TSOGS PA NI TSOGS PA CAN LAS NGO BO THA DAD DU MED PA’I PHYIR, ‘BRAS BU STE MGON BYED PA SOGS NI TSOGS PA CAN RNAMS KYI YIN PAR RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR BAS, MGON DANG ‘DUL BA DANG DBANG PO NYID RIGS PAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NA,

Suppose one were to entertain the following thought:

Now let’s consider the fact that the collection of parts cannot be separate from the thing that possesses this collection of parts.  As such, we can come to the realization that the result—which is to say, acting as a savior and so forth—is something that belongs to the one that possesses the collection of the parts.  As such, it is perfectly logical that we should have here the savior, or the trainer, or the absolute lord.


[3295]
BDAG GI SGRA RES ‘GA’ PHUNG PO TSOGS PA LA BYED LA, RES ‘GA’ TSOGS PA CAN PHUNG PO RNAMS LA NYE BAR SBYOR BA ‘DI LA, SNGAR DE LTAR ‘DOD DGUR BDAG GI SGRA SO SO LA SBYOR BA MI ‘THOB BO ZHES NYES PA BSHAD ZIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

But we have already long since explained the problems with this idea.  That is, suppose the appellation “self” applies at some points to the collection of the parts to the person, and then at other points applies to what is involved in the collection—which is to say, the parts themselves.  In this case then, as in your previous pile of assertions, they would not apply to the individual instances of the word, “self.”


	[3296]
[VI.135]
Kūṭasthānāṃ syād rathatvaṃ tadānīṃ
tasyāṅgānāṃ tulya ātmā rathena,
Skandhāṃś copādāya sūtre niruktas
tasmān nātmā skandha saṃhāta mātram.

[VI.135a]
,DE TSE DE YI YAN LAG TSOGS GNAS RNAMS,
,SHING RTA NYID ‘GYUR SHING RTA DANG BDAG MTSUNGS,

		At that point,
		When we pile
		The collection

		Of the various
		Components together,

		Then that would be
		A wagon itself.

		It’s the same,
		Whether you’re talking
		About a wagon
		Or a self.


[3297]
SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE, PHUNG PO’I TSOGS PA BDAG TU ‘DOD PA DE’I TSE [f. 227b] SHING RTA DE YI YAN LAG GI TSOGS PA PHYOGS GCIG TU GNAS PA RNAMS SHING RTA NYID DU ‘GYUR BA’I SKYON YOD DE, SHING RTA DANG BDAG GNYIS RANG GI YAN LAG TSOGS PA LA ‘JOG MI ‘JOG MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

There is also another problem here.  When we consider the collection of the parts to the person to be the self, then at that point we incur the problem that whenever we pile the collection of the various component parts to a wagon together in one place, then that would be a wagon itself.  And that’s because the question of whether or not we can posit something as the collection of its component parts is the same, whether you’re talking about a wagon or a self.


[3298]
MTSUNGS PAR BSTAN PA YANG MDO LAS,
,BDAG CES BYA BA BDUD KYI SEMS,
,KHYOD NI LTA BAR GYUR PA YIN,
,’DU BYED PHUNG PO ‘DI STONG STE,
,’DI LA SEMS CAN YOD MA YIN,

The fact that the question is the same is expressed in the following lines, from sutra—

	To say that something
	Is the self
	Is an idea of the devils,

	For this is what
	We call “the view.”

	The factors
	Are empty of
	The parts to the person;

	There was never any
	Living being here.


	[3299]
,JI LTAR YAN LAG TSOGS RNAMS LA,
,BRTEN NAS SHING RTA BRJOD PA LTAR,
,DE BZHIN PHUNG PO RNAMS BRTEN NAS,
,KUN RDZOB SEMS CAN ZHES BYA’O,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

	We refer to something
	As a “wagon”
	Based upon the collection
	Of its parts;

	In the same way,
	In deceptive terms
	We call someone
	
	A living being
	Based upon the
	Parts to the person.



Other sutras on simple collections

[3300]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second section here: relying on other sutras to explain how the simple collection of the parts to the person cannot be a self.


	[3301]
[VI.135b]
,MDO LAS PHUNG PO BRTEN NAS YIN GSUNGS PA,
,DE PHYIR PHUNG PO ‘DUS TZAM BDAG MA YIN,

		Sutra states that
		It is on the basis
		Of the parts
		To the person;

		As such, the simple
		Accumulation
		Of the parts

To the person
Is not the self [f. 211a].


[3302]
SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR NA MDO LAS PHUNG PO TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS SEMS CAN DU GDAGS PA YIN NO ZHES GSUNGS PA DE YI PHYIR PHUNG PO ‘DUS PA STE TSOGS PA TZAM BDAG MA YIN NO,,

As we explained earlier on, sutra states that the living being is something ascribed on the basis of the collection of the parts to the person.  As such, the simple accumulation or collection of the parts to the person is not the self.


[3303]
DE NYID SGRUB PA’I NGAG GIS GSAL BAR BYED PA NI, GANG ZHIG LA BRTEN NAS GANG BRTAGS PA DE NI BTAGS PA NYE BAR LEN PA’I YAN LAG TSOGS PA TZAM MA YIN TE, BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I PHYIR ‘BYUNG BA LAS GYUR PA BZHIN NO,,

Here is a clarification of this very point, made through the use of supporting logic.  That is, any entity which is ascribed on the basis of something is not the simple collection of the component parts that were taken on.  The case is similar to one in which something has come from the elements, as it is labeled on their basis.


[3304]
JI LTAR ‘BYUNG BA DAG RGYUR BYAS NAS, ‘BYUNG BA LAS GYUR PA SNGON PO LA SOGS PA DANG, MIG LA SOGS PA BTAGS MOD KYI DE GNYIS ‘BYUNG BA ‘DUS PA TZAM NYID NI MA YIN NO,,

That is, what’s happening here is the same as where we have the elements acting as a cause.  That is, we apply the labels “blue” and the like—or “the eye” and such—upon that which has derived from the physical elements.  But we wouldn’t say that these entities are nothing more than the coming together of those elements.


[3305]
DE BZHIN DU BDAG PHUNG PO RGYUR BAS {%BYAS} NAS BTAGS PA’I RANG BZHIN CAN YANG, PHUNG PO TSOGS PA TZAM YIN PAR MI RUNG NGO ZHES PA’O,,

Here it’s the same.  The self is indeed something that has the nature of being labeled through the parts to the person having provided the cause; but what we are saying is that it would be improper to refer to the self as the simple collection of those parts.


[3306]
GAL TE MDO LAS PHUNG PO TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS ZHES GSUNGS NA, TSOGS PA GANG ZAG TU MI RUNG YANG, DE BZHIN PHUNG PO RNAMS BRTEN NAS, ZHES PA TZAM LAS MED PAS PHUNG PO TSOGS PA GANG ZAG GI RTEN DU ‘JOG PA’I KHUNGS MIN NO SNYAM NA,

With this, one may have the following thought:

We see the phrase, in sutra, that “just so, it is through its dependence upon the collection of the parts to the person.”  And although it would be inappropriate to say that the collection was the person, we do see the phrase, “in the same way, it depends upon the parts to the person”—and that’s all we see.  As such, it would seem inappropriate to point to these references as a source for saying that the collection of the parts to the person is the basis of the person.


[3307]
DE NI MA YIN TE DPE’I SKABS SU, JI LTAR YAN LAG [f. 228a] TSOGS RNAMS LA, ZHES YAN LAG TSOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS SHING RTAR BSHAD LA,

That though is not the case.  When we get to the example used here, we see “based on the collection of its parts”; referring to the fact that we speak of something as a wagon based upon the collection of its parts.


[3308]
DE’I PHYIR SHING RTA DANG DPE DON DU SGRIG PA NA, DE BZHIN PHUNG PO RNAMS BRTEN NAS, ZHES PA’I SKABS SU TSOGS PA DNGOS SU MA BRJOD KYANG DE GDON DGOS PAR SHIN TU GSAL BAS MKHAS PA’I DBANG POS, MDO’I TSIG ZUR RE’I NUS PA ‘DON LUGS YIN PAS ZHIB PAR GO NA BLO LA DGA’ BA SKYED PA’O,,

As such, when we set forth both the metaphor and its referent in the case of the example of the wagon, it’s extremely clear that there is something additional which we need to bring out, even though it’s not directly stated at the point where they say, “just so, it is through its dependence upon the parts to the person.”  And this is the idea of “a collection.”  As such, it is the custom among those lords among sages to draw out the force of each separate word in a phrase from the sutras.  And if we really understand this point in detail, it is only a reason for us to rejoice.


[3309]
BUM PA LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYIS MA NGES PA NYID DO ZHE NA,

One may then ask,

But isn’t this idea drawn into question with things such as water pitchers and the like?


[3310]
DE YANG YOD PA MA YIN TE, BUM PA LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYANG GZUGS LA SOGS PA TSOGS PA TZAM NYID YIN PAR MA GRUB PA’I PHYIR DANG, DER YANG BDAG DANG ‘DRA BAR BRGAL ZHING BRTAG PA MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This though is not the case.  This is first of all because it is not the case that water pitchers and the like are simply the collection of form and the rest.  And secondly, the examination and the final conclusions we draw with them are just the same as we do with the self.


[3311]
‘DIS NI BDAG RANG GI CHA SHAS RNAMS TSOGS PA LA GZHAG TU MI RUNG BA BZHIN DU, BUM PA LA SOGS PA YANG RANG GI YAN LAG TSOGS PA TZAM LA ‘JOG TU MI RUNG BA GNYIS ‘DRA BAR BSTAN NO,,

What this is indicating is that the case here is just the same as with the example of the self, where we say it cannot simply be posited as the collection of its parts.  And so there is a similar instance here where it would incorrect to say that water pitchers or the like could be posited as nothing more than the collection of their component parts.



Denying the outline as the self

[3312]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third part from above: a denial that the outline of the simple collection of the parts to the person could be a self.


[3313]
CI STE ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA TSOGS PA TZAM NI SHING RTA MA YIN TE, ‘O NA CI ZHE NA,

One may begin with the following question—

Well then, if the simple collection of the wheels and so on is not the wagon, what is?


	[3314]
[VI.136]
Saṃsthānaṃ ced rūpiṇāṃ tasya sattvāt
teṣām evātmeti saṃjñā tava syāt,
Cittādīnāṃ saṃhater ātmatā tu
na syād yasmāt saṃniveśo’sti naiṣām.

,[211a] DBYIBS SHE NA DE GZUGS CAN LA YOD PHYIR,
,KHYOD LA DE DAG NYID BDAG CES ‘GYUR GYI,
,SEMS SOGS TSOGS NI BDAG NYID ‘GYUR MIN TE,
,GANG PHYIR DE DAG LA DBYIBS YOD MA YIN,

		And suppose you say
		It’s the outline.

		This is
Something possessed
By physical things;

With you,
These would be
Referred to
As the “self.”

It would not
Be the case that
The mind and such
Were this same self;

That’s because
These are not things
Which possess
Any outline.		


[3315]
GANG GI TSE ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA TSOGS PA NA SHING RTA’I DBYIBS KHYAD PAR CAN DANG LDAN PAR GYUR PA DE’I TSE SHING RTA’I MING RNYED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And suppose you begin your answer with saying that—at the point when the collection of the wheels and so on takes on that distinctive outline of a wagon—then at that time it is granted the name of “wagon.”


[3316]
DE BZHIN DU SEMS CAN GYI RGYUD KYI GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I PHUNG PO RNAMS KYI DBYIBS KYI BKOD PA TZAM BDAG YIN NO ZHE NA,

And suppose you say,

It’s the same with the outline of the form and the rest of the parts included within the person of the particular living being; this then is what the “self” is.


[3317]
DBYIBS DE NI GZUGS CAN KHO NA LA YOD PA’I PHYIR, KHYOD LA STE LTAR NA GZUGS CAN DE DAG NYID DE KHO NA BDAG CES BYA PAR ‘GYUR GYI, 

But the fact is that this kind of outline is something possessed only by physical things; as such, “with you” (meaning, “according to you”) it is only these physical parts here that would be referred to as the “self.”


[3318]
SEMS DANG SOGS PAS SEMS BYUNG GI TSOGS LA NI, BDAG NYID DU ‘JOG PAR ‘GYUR BA MIN PAR ‘GYUR TE, GANG GI PHYIR NA SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG DE DAG LA DBYIBS YOD PA MA YIN PA’I [f. 228b] PHYIR TE, GZUGS CAN MA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO SNYAM DU BSAMS SO,,

It would not though be the case that you were positing the collection of the mind “and such” (which would include the mental functions) as being this same self.  And that’s because these mind and mental functions are not things which possess any outline—for they are not physical.  This is the thinking here.



Other problems with
parts as a self

[3319]
BZHI PA NI,

Which brings us to our fourth part from above: a demonstration of other problems with the position that the simple collection of the parts to the person could be a self.


	[3320]
[VI.137]
Nopādātuś caikatā yukta rūpā
svopādānaiḥ kartṛ karmaikataivam,
Syāt kartāsan karma cāstīti ced dhīr
no kartāraṃ yad vinā nāsti karma.

,LEN PO RANG NYER LEN GCIG RIGS DNGOS MIN,
,DE LTA NA LAS BYED PO GCIG NYID ‘GYUR,
,BYED PO MED LAS YOD SNYAM BLO YIN NA,
,MA YIN GANG PHYIR BYED PO MED LAS MED,

		The one doing
		The taking,
		Themselves,
		
		Would be
		What is taken;

		It is illogical
		To say that these
		Could be
		A single thing.

		In that case
		The action
		And the agent
		
		Would constitute
		A single entity.

		There cannot exist
		An agent;

		Suppose you
		Are thinking
		That it is
		The action.

		This cannot be
		The case,
		For the reason that
		
		There is no such thing
		As an action
		Without an agent.


[3321]
SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE ‘DIS NYE BAR LEN PAR BYED PAS NA, NYE BAR LEN PA PO RANG STE BYED PA PO BDAG DANG, ‘DI NYE BAR BLANG BAR BYA BAS NA NYE BAR LEN PA STE LAS SU BYA BA PHUNG PO LNGA’O, ,DE GNYIS GCIG PA’I DNGOS POR RIGS PA MIN PA NI TSOGS PA TZAM BDAG TU ‘JOG PAR MI RIGS PA’O,,

And there are still other problems here.  This in fact is what does the taking on; so that, in this case, the one doing the taking on themselves would be both the agent here—the self—and what it took on as well: what is taken (which is to say, the five parts to the person which are the object of the action here).  It is illogical though to say that these two could constitute a single thing; as such, it is also illogical to say that it is the simple collection alone which is the self.


[3322]
GAL TE GZUGS SOGS KYI PHUNG PO TSOGS TZAM BDAG YIN PA DE LTA NA NI LAS DANG BYED PA PO RNAMS GCIG NYID DU ‘GYUR LA,

Suppose then that the simple collection of the parts here—form and the rest of the parts to the person—constituted the self.  In that case, the action undertaken, and the agent of that action, would constitute a single entity.


[3323]
‘DI NI ‘DOD PA YANG MA YIN TE, ‘BYUNG BA DANG ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR GYI GZUGS GNYIS DANG, BUM PA DANG RDZA MKHAN KYANG GCIG NYID DU ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

But neither is this something that you could agree to.  Because in this case, the pair of the elements and the products of the elements—as well as clay pot and the potter themselves—would be one & the same.


[3324]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,GAL TE SHING DE ME YIN NA,
,BYED PA PO DANG LAS GCIG ‘GYUR,
ZHES DANG,

As Wisdom puts it,

	If the firewood
	Were the fire,

	Then the agent
	And the action
	Would be one & the same.


	[3325]
,ME DANG SHING GIS BDAG DANG NI,
,NYE BAR BLANG BA’I RIM PA KUN,
,BUM SNAM SOGS DANG LHAN CIG TU,
,MA LUS PAR NI RNAM PAR BSHAD,
CES GSUNGS SO,,

And it states as well:

	Fire and firewood
	Explain all the steps

	Between the self
	And the things
	That we take on.

	The same applies
	To water pitchers,
	And bolts of cloth,

	And everything else
	That exists in combination.
	

[3326]
‘DIR ME DANG BUD SHING DAG GCIG NYID DU MI ‘DOD PA DE BZHIN DU, BDAG DANG NYE BAR LEN PA DAG LA YANG MI ‘DOD PAR BYA DGOS TE, DE GNYIS MTSUNGS PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What this is saying is that we could never agree that a fire and the firewood were one and the same thing.  Neither could we ever say this about the two of the self and what the self took on.  The two cases, these lines are pointing out, are equivalent.


[3327]
CI STE BYED PA PO NYID DU ‘GYUR BA PHUNG PO TSOGS PA NYE BAR LEN PA PO NI ‘GA’ YANG MED DE, BYED PA PO ‘DI NI NYE BAR LEN PA LAS SU BYA BA PHUNG PO ‘DUS PA TZAM ZHIG YOD DO SNYAM DU BLO LA SEMS PA YIN NA, 

The point is that there cannot exist, at all, a collection of the parts to the person—what it is that we take on—which were as well the very agent of this action.  Which is to say, suppose you are thinking to yourself—suppose you have the idea—that the agent here is what is taken on: the simple assembly of the parts to the person, the object of the agent’s action.


[3328]
DE NI DE LTAR MA YIN TE, GANG GI PHYIR NA BYED PA PO MED NA RGYU MED PA’I LAS KYANG MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This though simply cannot be the case, for the reason that there is no such thing as an action without a cause: where there is no agent.


[3329]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,DE BZHIN NYER LEN SHES PAR BYA,
,LAS DANG BYED PO BSAL PHYIR RO,
,BYED PA PO DANG LAS DAG GIS,
,DNGOS PO LHAG MA SHES PAR BYA,
ZHES GSUNGS TE,

Wisdom says it this way:

	Understand
	What is taken on
	In the very same way,

	Since the action
	And the agent
	Are distinct.

	You can understand
	The rest of all
	Functional things

	With the pair
	Of an agent,
	And an act.


[3330]
LAS DANG BYED PA PO RANG [f. 229a] BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA BKAG PA’I RIGS PAS NYE BAR BLANG BA DANG LEN PA PO YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA BKAG PA YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

You should understand that—using the same logic we employ to deny that the action & the agent could exist through some nature of their own—we deny that the agent of taking things on, and the one who does the taking, could exist either through any nature of their own.


[3331]
DNGOS PO LHAG MA NI TSIG GSAL LAS, BSKYED BYA SKYED BYED DANG ‘GRO BA DANG ‘GRO BA PO DANG, BLTA BYA LTA BYED DANG, MTSAN NYID DANG MTSAN GZHI DANG, ‘BYUNG BAR BYA BA DANG, {%no ,} ‘BYUNG BAR BYED PA DANG, YAN LAG DANG YAN LAG CAN DANG, YON TAN DANG YON TAN CAN DANG, TSAD MA DANG GZHAL BYA LA SOGS PA’I DNGOS PO MA LUS PA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA BKAG STE, PHAN TSUN LTOS PA’I GRUB PA NYID YIN PAR SHES RAB CAN GYIS SHES PAR BYA’O,

As for the rest of functioning things, we can follow the words of A Clarification of the Verses:

We deny that any functional entity at all could ever exist through some nature of its own, whether we’re talking about things that start or the things that start them; or goings or the one who goes; or what is viewed, and the the one who views it; or definitions or things defined; or the fact of things happening or what makes them happen; or the component parts of things or the wholes made up of those parts; or specific qualities and those that possess those qualities; or accurate perceptions and the objects which those perceptions hold under their consideration.  And this is all because those who possess wisdom understand that all these are nothing but things which occur in mutual reliance.


[3332]
ZHES GSUNGS PAS BYA BYED SPYI DANG, KHYAD PAR DU TSAD MA DANG GZHAL BYA’I BYA BYED RNAMS NGO BO NYID KYIS MA GRUB CING, LTOS ‘GRUB KYI TSUL GYIS KHAS LEN PA YIN TE,

Given this kind of statement, what we accept is that neither actions & agents in general—nor, more particularly, actions & agents in the form of accurate perceptions and the objects under their consideration—could ever exist through some essential nature of their own; but rather through a process of reliance.


[3333]
LTOS ‘GRUB ‘DI LA GNYIS KA PHAN TSUN LTOS PA’I THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I ‘JOG LUGS YOD PA RNAMS SHES DGOS PAR YOD DO,,

And as regards this process of reliance, you should understand the unique methods in which we establish both of the two here as sharing a mutual reliance.


[3334]
NYE BAR LEN PA ZHES PA ‘DIR DNGOS PO LA AU PA TRA ZHES PA SGRA’I BYINGS LA, L’U tA’I RKYEN BYIN NA NYE BAR LEN PAS NA, NYE BAR LEN PA ZHES BYA BA YIN LA,

When we talk about “things taken on” here, we are referring to working things as in the Sanskrit term, upatra.  And then if we take this root and do the lūṭa strengthening it goes towards taking something on, which is how we arrive at “taken on.”


[3335]
DNGOS PO YANG RANG GI SGRUB PAR BYED PA MED PAR ‘BYUNG BA MA YIN PAS, RANG GI SGRUB PAR BYED PA NYE BAR BLANG BA DANG, NYE BAR LEN PA PO GNYIS KA YANG NYE BAR LEN PA ZHES PAR ‘JOG GO

Working things are not entities that can occur in an absence of what produces them; and so we can speak of what produces them as both that taking them on, and as the entity it is which takes them on.


[3336]
,GAL TE L’U tA’I RKYEN GYIS ‘DIS NYE BAR LEN PA’I BYA BA TZAM BRJOD PA’I PHYIR, NYE BAR BLANG BAR BYA BA’I LAS JI LTAR BRJOD CE NA,

One may then raise the following question:

The function of the lūṭa strengthening here is only to convey the connotation of “that which is taken on”; how then do you derive the action of taking on out of it here?


[3337]
KRI {%KRi?} TA DANG L’U tA NI PHAL CHER RO, ZHES SGRA’I GZHUNG LAS ‘BYUNG BAS PHAL CHER DE LTAR YIN KYANG, LAS LA L’U tA’I RKYEN BYIN PA NA NYE BAR BLANG BAR BYA BA’I [f. 229b] LAS KYANG BRJOD PA MI ‘GAL LO,,

The texts on Sanskrit grammar mention, at this point, “kṛta and lūṭa, for the most part…”  What this is saying is that what you have noted is, for the most part, the case; but that if you do the lūṭa strengthening, it is no contradiction to say that we are also talking about the action of taking something on.


[3338]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,DE LTAR LEN LAS GZHAN MA YIN,
,DE NI NYER LEN NYID KYANG MIN,
,BDAG NI NYE BAR LEN MED MIN,
,MED PA NYID DU’ANG DE MA NGES,

Wisdom also puts it this way:

	It is not something
	Separate from the taking;

	Nor is it
	The taking on itself.

	Neither is the self
	Without taking on;

	Neither can it be
	Found amidst
	Its total absence.


[3339]
ZHES BDAG NYE BAR LEN PA LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA DANG, NYE BAR LEN PA NYID BDAG MIN PA DANG, BDAG NI NYE BAR LEN PA BZUNG BA LA LTOS PA MED PA’ANG MIN PA DANG, BDAG DE MED PA YANG MIN PAR GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that the self is not essentially separate from the taking on, nor is the taking on itself not the self; and neither is the self something which has no reliance on what is taken on; but neither is the self something which cannot exist.


[3340]
DE’I PHYIR BYED PA PO MED PAR LAS KYANG YOD PA MIN NO,,

As such, there can be no action without an agent.


[3341]
YANG DON DAM PA STONG PA NYID KYI MDO GANG LAS BYED PA PO NI MA DMIGS KYI, LAS KYANG YOD LA RNAM PAR SMIN PA YANG YOD DO ZHES BRJOD PA’I MDO 

But then we also see, in the sutras about things ultimately being emptiness, the statement that no agent can be found; but still the action exists, and it has a ripening.


[3342]
DE LAS NI, BYED PA PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA BKAG PAR SHES PAR BYA’I, RTEN NAS GDAGS PAR BYA BA THA SNYAD KYI YAN LAG TU GYUR PA YANG BKAG GO ,ZHES BYA BAR NI SHES PAR MI BYA’O,,

What this says is that we should understand that the agent existing through some nature of its own is denied; but that we are not to entertain the understanding that we deny something which can be, nominally, the adjunct here: something which is labeled through reliance.


[3343]
DE SKAD DU YANG, MA RIG PA DANG RJES SU ‘BREL BA’I GANG ZAG ‘DI NI BSOD NAMS MNGON PAR ‘DU BYA BA YANG MNGON PAR ‘DU BYED DO, ZHES RGYA CHER GSUNGS SO,,

We also see statements, on a common basis, which say that “the person connected to the misunderstanding is both that thing which is assembled by the good deeds, and also that thing which does the assembling.”


[3344]
MDO GONG MA NGO BO NYID MED PAR SMRA BA LA MI ‘GRIG GI ,SEMS TZAM GYI TSUL LA ‘GRIG GO ZHES RNAM BSHAD RIGS PA LAS GSUNGS MOD KYANG, 

Now it is the case that Reasoning in Explanation says that the sutra reference above would not be allowable for those who say that nothing has any essential nature of its own; but that it would be allowable in the system of the Mind Only.


[3345]
LUGS MCHOG TU GYUR PA ‘DI’I GANG ZAG ‘JOG TSUL LA NI, PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BYED PA PO THA SNYAD TZAM DU YANG MED PA DANG, THA SNYAD DU LAS DANG RNAM SMIN KHAS BLANGS PA NA,

How is it that this highest of all systems establishes what the person is?  An agent which is essentially different from the heaps is something that could never exist, even nominally.  Nominally though karma and its consequences are accepted.


[3346]
MDO PHYI MAS GSUNGS PA BZHIN DU LAS KYI BYED PA PO GANG ZAG NGES PAR ‘DOD DGOS PAS DE YANG NYE BAR BLANG BYA’I GSEB NAS MI ‘JOG PAR, DE DAG GI NYE BAR LEN PA PO ‘JOG PA NI SHIN TU LEGS PA YIN NO,,

As the latter sutra reference puts it, we definitely have to accept someone, a person, who is the one who commits the karma.  As such, it is quite perfect if we establish this as the one who takes on those things; rather than dumping them in the middle of everything it is that we take on.



The self as the six elements

[3347]
LNGA PA NI,

Here then is our fifth point from above: a description of how the Able Ones have stated that the self is merely something labeled upon the basis of things like the six elements.


	[3348]
[VI.138]
Bhūmyambutejāṃsi samīraṇaṃ ca
vijñānam ākāśam iti pratītya,
Dhātūn ṣaḍ ātmā muninopadiṣṭaḥ
sparśāśrayāṃ ṣaṭ ca sa cakṣurādīm.

,GANG PHYIR THUB PAS BDAG DE SA CHU ME,
,RLUNG DANG RNAM SHES NAM MKHA’ ZHES BYA BA,
,KHAMS DRUG DANG NI MIG SOGS REG PA YI,
,RTEN DRUG DAG LA BRTEN NAS NYER
BRTEN {%BSTAN} ZHING,

	Because the Able One
	Has presented a teaching
	Which states that
	
	The self is something
	Which depends upon

	The six elements we know as
	Earth, water, fire, and wind;
	Consciousness, and space;

	As well as the six bases
	Of contact involving
	The eye and so on;


[VI.139]
Dharmān upādāya sa citta caittān
nirucyate yena tato na tattvam,
Tebhyo’sya no saṃhati mātratā ca
tasmād ahaṃkāra matir na teṣu.

,SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG CHOS RNAMS
NYER BZUNG NAS,
,DES GSUNGS DE PHYIR DE NI DE RNAMS DANG,
,DE NYID MA YIN TSOGS TZAM NYID MIN TE,
,DE PHYIR NGAR ‘DZIN BLO DE RNAMS LA MIN,

And has also stated
That it is taken as
The entities

Of the mind and
The mental functions,

It would be inappropriate
To say that it constituted
These here, or any one
Of these same things;

Neither is it
The simple collection.

As such, the state
Of mind which has held
To “This is me” 
Is not upon these.


[3349]
PHUNG PO SOGS TSOGS TZAM NYID BDAG TU ‘DOD PA LA SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE,

Now there are also other problems with the position that the simple collection of the parts to the person and such are the self.
 

[3350]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR THUB PAS YAB SRAS [f. 230a] MJAL BA’I MDO LAS BDAG DE SA DANG CHU DANG ME DANG RLUNG GI KHAMS DANG, RNAM PAR SHES PA’I KHAMS DANG, SNA’I BU GA SOGS BU GA NAM MKHA’ YI KHAMS ZHES BYA BA’I KHAMS DRUG LA BRTEN NAS DANG,

This is the case because, for the reason that the Able One—in the sutra known as The Meeting of the Father & the Son—has presented a teaching which states that the self is something which depends, first of all, on the six elements.  These include the elements we know as earth, water, fire, and wind; the element of consciousness; and the element of space, which incorporates things like the cavity within the nose, and such.


[3351]
MIG GI REG PA’I SKYE MCHED DANG LA SOGS PAS YID KYI REG PA YI SKYE MCHED DRUG DAG LA BRTEN NAS NYE BAR BSTAN ZHING,

The Able One has taught as well that the self is something which depends upon the six different doors of sense with contact involving the eye, and “so on”—which also further refers to contact involving the thought.


[3352]
SEMS DANG DE DAG LAS GZHAN PA’I SEMS BYUNG GI CHOS RNAMS GDAGS GZHIR NYE BAR BZUNG BA LA BRTEN NAS BDAG TU ‘DOGS SO ZHES NGES PAR TE GSAL BAR GSUNGS PA DE’I PHYIR,

The Able One has also quite surely—which is to say, clearly—stated that the self is something which is labeled on the basis of (having taken as what is labeled) the entitites of the mind and the mental functions which are separate from those others.


[3353]
BDAG DE NI SA’I KHAMS LA SOGS PA’I YA GYAL DE RNAMS DANG, DE NYID MA YIN PA STE DE RNAMS RE RE NAS BDAG TU MI RUNG LA, DE RNAMS KYI TSOGS PA TZAM NYID KYANG BDAG TU ‘JOG PA MIN TE,

It would be inappropriate to say that this self constituted these various divisions here, such as the element of earth and the like; or that it was “any one of these same things”—which means, these elements taken separately.  But neither is it the case that we can posit the self as being the simple collection of these things.


[3354]
DE’I PHYIR THOG MA MED PA NAS ZHUGS PA’I NGA’O SNYAM DU ‘DZIN PA’I BLOS CHOS DE RNAMS KYI TSOGS PA DANG YA GYAL RNAMS LA DMIGS PAR BYED PA MIN NO,,

As such, we can say that the state of mind which for time with no beginning has held to, or thought, “This is me” is not something which is focused upon either the collection or the individual divisions of these various entities.


[3355]
MDO LAS GSUNGS TSUL NI, RGYAL PO CHEN PO SKYES BU GANG ZAG DE NI KHAMS DRUG DANG REG PA’I SKYE MCHED DRUG DANG, YID KYI NYE BAR RGYU BA BCO BRGYAD DO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And how is it that sutra makes these statements?  We see the following:

O Great King, this individual—this person—consists of the flow of eighteen different things: the six elements, along with the six doors of sense in contact, and their awarenesses.


[3356]
NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, KHAMS DRUG ‘DUS PA, REG PA’I GZHI DRUG PA, YID KYI NYE BAR SPYOD PA BCO BRGYAD PA’O, ZHES BSGYUR BA LEGS SO,,

The translation of Naktso here is preferred:

…the group of eighteen including the collection of the six elements; the six bases of contact; and the activities of the thought. 


[3357]
DE LA SKYES BU DANG GANG ZAG NI RNAM GRANGS SO,,

When the reference here mentions “individual” and “person,” they are meant as synonyms.


[3358]
KHAMS DRUG ‘DUS PA DANG GZHI DRUG PA DANG, BCO BRGYAD PA’O ZHES PA GSUM PO NI LDAN PA’I CHOS YIN PAS CHOS DE DAG NI LDAN CHOS DANG, GANG ZAG NI DE DAG GANG LA LDAN PA’I LDAN GZHI DANG, GANG LA BRTEN NAS GANG ZAG TU ‘DOGS PA’I GZHIR GSUNGS SO,,

When they speak here of the “collection of the six elements” and the six bases and the eighteen, these three are what is possessed in this case.  As such, these are the entitites which are possessed; and the person is being described as the basis which possesses these things—as the basis for labeling something “person.”


[3359]
YID KYI NYER RGYU BCO BRGYAD NI, YUL YID DU ‘ONG BA DRUG LA [f. 230b] TSOR BA BDE BA NYE BAR RGYU BA DRUG DANG, YID DU MI ‘ONG DRUG LA TSOR BA SDUG BSNGAL NYE BAR RGYU BA DRUG DANG, BAR MA DRUG LA TSOR BA BTANG SNYOMS NYE BAR RGYU BA DRUG GO

When they speak here of the “flow” of the mind in eighteen different parts, what they’re referring to is six flows of pleasant feelings with the six desirable objects of perception; six flows of unpleasant feelings with the six undesirable objects of perception; and six flows of neutral feelings with the six inbetween objects of perception.


[3360]
,TSOR BA BDE SDUG BTANG SNYOMS KYI DBANG GIS YID GZUGS SGRA SOGS LA YANG DANG YANG DU RGYU BAR BYED PA’I PHYIR, YID KYI NYE BAR RGYU BA ZHES BYA’O,,

The reason that we speak here of the “flow of the thought” is that the thought runs again and again to visible forms, audible objects, and the like; all due to the power of these feelings of pleasure, pain, and neutral sensation.


[3361]
DE LTAR PHUNG PO RNAMS NGAR ‘DZIN LHAN SKYES KYI DMIGS RNAM GNYIS KYI NANG NAS, DMIGS PA’I YUL YANG MA YIN LA, PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I DE’I DMIGS PA YANG YOD PA MA YIN PA’I PHYIR,

Thus we can say that—from among the two different objects of focus for the inborn form of the tendency to perceive some “me”—the different parts to the person are not the object of focus.  But neither is it the case that there are some objects of focus here which are essentially separate from the parts to the person.


[3362]
NGAR ‘DZIN GYI DMIGS YUL RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MA YIN PAS, RNAL ‘BYOR BAS BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MA DMIGS PA LAS, BDAG GI BA YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SNYING PO DANG LDAN PA MA YIN PA NYID DU SHES SHING,

The object of focus for the tendency to hold to some “me” is not something which could exist through some nature of its own.  As such, we should understand that when the deep practitioner fails to perceive any self that could exist through some nature of its own, what belongs to the self can only be something which could never have possessed any essence of existing through any nature of its own, either.


[3363]
‘DUS BYAS ‘KHOR BA MTHA’ DAG GI ‘CHING BA BSAL NAS YANG SRID PHYI MA LEN PA MED PAR NGES PAR MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR TE,

When we have cleared away all the produced entities of the fetters of this circle of suffering life, then it is a certainty that we can no longer take any additional rebirths—and we have attained nirvana.


[3364]
DE’I PHYIR PHUNG PO LNGA’I YA GYAL DANG TSOGS PA DANG, DE DAG LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA GANG YANG BDAG LHA’I {%LTA’I} DMIGS PAR MI ‘JOG PA DANG, DE LTA NA’ANG BDAG LTA’I DMIGS  PA GANG ZAG LEGS PAR ‘JOG SHES PA DANG,

Thus it is that we are unable to say that what the view of a “self” focuses upon could be either the five parts to the person taken individually, or as a collection; or something which was essentially separate from these.  Nonetheless, we can quite perfectly posit the person as being what the view of a “self” focuses upon.


[3365]
RGYU MTSAN DE DAG LA BRTEN NAS GANG ZAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PAR ‘JOG PA’I RNAM PAR DPYOD PA ‘DI NI, THAR PA ‘DOD PA’I DBANG PO SHIN TU RNON PO LA CHES MDZES PA YIN TE, ‘DIS YID ‘PHROG PA ‘DRA BA GRUB PA’I MTHA’ GZHAN LA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We can also say that—based on all these reasons—this particular logical examination where we establish how the person is empty of existing through any nature of its own is something extremely beautiful for those individuals of sharp faculties who hope for freedom.  There is no presentation found in any other school of thought which can so completely steal our hearts as this one does.



The irrelevance of others’ position

[3366]
LNGA PA NI,

This brings us to our fifth point here, which is a demonstration that the position of others here is irrelevant to the case.


[3367]
NGA’O SNYAM DU ‘DZIN PA’I DMIGS PA’I YUL BDAG GI BTAGS DON BTZAL BA NA, KHA CIG PHUNG PO LNGA CHAR DANG, KHA CIG SEMS GCIG PU YIN NO ZHES SMRA BA’I

Here the position is stated as follows.  When we look for what it is that we name the “self”—that is, the object that holding to the thought of “me” is focused upon—some people say that it is all five parts to the person; while others say that it is the mind alone.


[3368]
PHYOGS LTAR NA, JI SRID DU RANG GI RGYUD LA PHUNG PO [f. 231a] RNAMS ‘BYUNG BA DE SRID DU GANG ZAG GI BDAG TU ‘DZIN PA ‘JUG PAR ‘GYUR TE, NGA’O SNYAM PA’I NGA’I BTAGS DON BTZAL NAS ‘JOG PA

According to these views, then so long as the parts to the person included in a particular person’s being are still occurring, then the tendency to hold to some self-nature of the person will continue to engage.  This then is how we establish what it is that we are referring to as “me” when we have the thought of “me.”


[3369]
LTAR NA, DE NYID GANG ZAG GI BDAG TU ‘DZIN PA’I GZHI STE RNAM PA’I YUL GYI DNGOS POR YOD PA’I PHYIR RO ZHES BSHAD PA,

According to this position, this then is the basis for holding to the self of the person; because there does exist an object of this state of mind which is a specific entity.


	[3370]
[VI.140]
Nityātmā ca kṣipyate’nātma bodhe
nāhaṃkārasyāśrayaś cāyam iṣṭaḥ,
Ātmābhāva jñena kiṃ tat svadṛṣṭer
utkhātaś cetyucyate’tīva citram.

,BDAG MED RTOGS TSE RTAG PA’I BDAG SPONG ZHING,
,’DI NI NGAR ‘DZIN RTEN DU’ANG MI ‘DOD PA,
,DE PHYIR BDAG MED SHES PAS BDAG LTA BA,
,DPYIS KYANG ‘BYIN ZHES SMRA BA SHIN TU MTSAR,

		At the point
		Where one perceives
		The lack of self,

		We have to eliminate
		The self which is
		Unchanging;

		And yet neither
		Do we accept
		That this is the basis
		For our grasping
		To a “me.”

		And so then
		We have this position
		Of understanding
		That this simple self
		Could never exist;

		And then we tear out
		This view of some self,
		With finality.

		It is exceedingly strange!


[3371]
GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED PA MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PAR ‘DOD PA’I TSE NA, RTAG PA’I BDAG TZAM ZHIG SPONG BA STE MED PAR MTHONG ZHING, RTAG PA’I BDAG ‘DI NI ‘JIG LTA LHAN SKYES KYI NGAR ‘DZIN GYI RTEN TE DMIGS PA DANG RNAM PA GANG GI YUL DU’ANG MI ‘DOD PA,

Now suppose we are talking about the point where one is desirous of perceiving the lack of self to the person, in a direct way.  Here the only thing we have to eliminate is the self which is unchanging; which is to say, we have to see that it is something which does not exist.  And yet neither do we accept that this unchanging self is the basis for the innate form of the view of destruction: our grasping to a “me.”  That is, we do not accept that it is the object here, whether you’re talking about that thing which we are focused upon, or the aspect which this focus takes.


[3372]
DE’I PHYIR RTAG PA’I BDAG TZAM MED PAR MTHONG BA’I SHES PA GOMS PAS, THOG MA MED PA NAS ZHUGS PA’I BDAG TU LTA BA DPYIS TE DRUNGS NAS KYANG ‘BYIN ZHES SMRA BA NI,

And so then we have this position that one accustoms themselves to the understanding where they see that this simple self which is unchanging could never exist; and then, with this, we also tear out this view where we have perceived, for time with no beginning, some self; we tear it out “with finality”—which is to say, from the very root.


[3373]
KYE MA MA LA KHYOD KYI ‘DI NI SHIN TU MTSAR RO,,

And all we have to say about this position of yours is that it is exceedingly strange!


[3374]
RTAG PA’I BDAG TZAM MED PAR MTHONG BAS THOG MA MED PA’I BDAG ‘DZIN SPONG BAR ‘DOD PA’I DON ‘DI NYID, PHAN TSUN ‘BREL PA MED PAR ‘JIG RTEN PA’I DPE’I SGO NAS GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

And so let’s consider the point that you make when you take the position that people can eliminate their habit of grasping to a self—a habit they have had for time with no beginning—by seeing no more than the absence of a self which is unchanging.  We are going to explain here a way of clarifying, through a worldly metaphor, that this position relates to things that have no mutual connection at all.


	[3375]
[VI.141]
Paśyann ahiṃ chidragataṃ svagehe
gajo’tra nāstīti nirastaśaṅkaḥ,
Jahāti sarpād api nāma bhītim
aho hi nāmārjavatā parasya.

,RANG KHYIM RTZIG PHUG SBRUL GNAS MTHONG BZHIN DU,
,’DI NA GLANG CHEN MED CES DOGS BSAL TE,
,SBRUL GYI ‘JIGS PA’ANG SPONG BAR BYED PA NI,
,KYE MA GZHAN GYI GNAM POR ‘GYUR NYID DO,

		Some saw
		That there was
		A snake living

		Inside the wall
		Of their own home;
		They live in it.

		And then
		Someone dispels
		All their worries
		By saying
		“There’s no elephant!”

		They are also able
		To stop being afraid
		About the snake.

		Oh my gosh!
		Others would consider
		This kind of person
		A real laughing stock!		


[3376]
GANG ZAG BLUN PO KHA CIG RANG GI KHYIM GYI RTZIG PHUG NA SBRUL GNAS PA MTHONG NAS ‘JIGS BZHIN DU GNAS PA LA, GZHAN ZHIG GIS KYE MI KHYOD MA ‘JIGS SHIG KHYIM ‘DI NA GLANG CHEN MED DO ZHES DOGS PA BSAL BA NA,

And so say there were some foolish persons who saw that there was a snake living inside the wall of their own home—they live then in a state of fear.  And then another person comes along and dispels all their worries by saying, “Hey there!  You have no reason to be scared!  There’s no elephant here in your house, at all!”


[3377]
KHYIM DER GLANG PO CHE MED PAR SHES PAS DE’I ‘JIGS PA LDOG PAR MA ZAD SBRUL GYI ‘JIGS PA’ANG SPONG BAR BYED PA NI, KYE MA’O MKHAS PA GZHAN GYI GNAM POR TE BZHAD GAD DU ‘GYUR BA NYID DO,,

And so once these people have learned that there’s no elephant there in their house, they not only stop being afraid about the elephant, but they are also able to stop being afraid about the snake.  Oh my gosh!  This kind of person is someone that other thinkers would consider a real laughing stock: a real joke.


[3378]
DE LTAR SBRUL GYI ‘JIGS PA’I RKYEN NYE BAR GNAS SU ZIN KYANG, BLUN PO GZHAN GYI TSIG LAS SBRUL LA YOD PA’I [f. 231b] ‘JIGS PA MA MTHONG BAS,

And so the situation you have here is that there is—close at hand—something which should rightfully make you afraid of a snake.  The fools here though—because of what they’ve been told by others—don’t see any reason to be afraid about the presence of a snake.


[3379]
DE’I ‘JIGS PA BZLOG THABS MI BYED PAR GLANG PO CHE MED PAR SHES PA LAS BAG PHAB STE SDOD PA NA SBRUL GYIS ‘DZIN PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And so they don’t take any action to try to remedy this particular fear, but rather sit full of relief, in the knowledge that there is no elephant here.  And then of course they are clasped by the snake.


[3380]
DE BZHIN DU GLANG PO CHE LTA BU’I RTAG PA’I BDAG TZAM MED PAR MTHONG BA GOMS PAS, SBRUL LTA BU’I THOG MA MED PA NAS ZHUGS PA’I BDAG ‘DZIN GYI ‘JIGS PA LDOG PAR BZUNG NAS BAG PHAB PAS NI,

Here it’s the same; the practitioner has perceived no more than the absence of an unchanging self, which is comparable to the elephant.  And they sit in relief that they have thus escaped any fear of the perception which is like the snake—the tendency to hold onto a self which has lived in their hearts for time with no beginning.


[3381]
PHUNG PO’I YUL CAN DU ‘DOD PA’I NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG LTA BSAL BAR MI NUS TE, DE’I PHYIR NGES PAR GANG ZAG ‘DI’I ‘KHOR BA NYAMS BAR {%PAR} MI ‘GYUR RO,,

This sense of relief though is not something which has the power to dispel the view of destruction, where they hold to a “me” in the form of believing in a subject involving the five parts to the person.  As such, it is a certainty that the circle of suffering—for this individual—will not subside.


[3382]
‘DIS NI RANG GZHAN GYI SDE PA DNGOS PO’I DE KHO NA NYID GTAN LA ‘BEBS PAR ‘DOD PA MANG POS, LHAN SKYES KYI BDAG ‘DZIN GYIS JI LTAR BZUNG BA’I YUL SUN ‘BYIN PA MI SHES PAS,

The point here is that there are many individuals—in both our own schools of thought, and others—who believe that they have managed to set forth just what constitutes the suchness of entities.  But actually they have no understanding of how to smash objects as they are held to exist by the inborn form of the tendency to grasp to some self.


[3383]
DE DOR NAS DE LAS GZHAN PA’I DE NYID GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA’I RNAM GZHAG THAMS CAD SNYING PO MED PA’I GNAS LA NGAL BA BYED PAR BSTAN TE,

And so what all this is describing is that these people have actually given up this particular kind of smashing, and instead are exhausting themselves in all these presentations that seek to set forth some other kind of suchness, and thus have no essential point at all.


[3384]
‘DI SHES PA SHIN TU GNAD CHE’O,,

It is absolutely crucial that you understand this point.



Denying that the basis
and what relies on it are involved

[3385]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, RTEN DANG BRTEN PA DANG LDAN PA’I PHYOGS DGAG PA, BKAG PA RNAMS KYI DON BSDOMS TE BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

These brings us to our third more general part from above: denying positions other than the previous two, which themselves involve three ideas, including one about the basis and what relies upon this basis.  We proceed in two steps: a denial of the position which says that both basis and what relies upon this basis are involved; and then a summary presentation of the denials.  Here is the first.


[3386]
DE LTAR BDAG PHUNG PO DANG RANG BZHIN GCIG DANG THA DAD GANG DU YANG MA GRUB PAR BSTAN NAS, BDAG PHUNG PO DANG PHAN TSUN RTEN DANG BRTEN PA NYID DU YANG NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PAR BRJOD PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Having thus presented how the self is neither essentially the same nor separate from the parts to the person, we will now make an explanation which is meant to express how the self and the parts to the person cannot exist, mutually, either exactly as a basis or what relies upon this basis, at least in a way where this exists through some essence of its own.


	[3387]
[VI.142]
Skandheṣvātmā vidyate naiva cāmī
santi skandhā nātmanītīha yasmāt,
Satyanyatve syād iyaṃ kalpanā vai
tac cānyatvaṃ nāstyataḥ kalpanaiṣā.

,PHUNG POR BDAG YOD MA YIN BDAG LA YANG,
,PHUNG PO DE RNAMS YOD MIN GANG PHYIR ‘DIR,
,GZHAN NYID YOD NA RTOG PA ‘DIR ‘GYUR NA,
,GZHAN NYID DE MED DE PHYIR ‘DI RTOG PA’O,

		The self is not something
		That exists in the parts
		To the person; neither
	
		Are the parts to the person
		Something which exists
		In the self.

		Why can we say this?
		Suppose here they
		Were perfectly separate.

		If these ideas were
		Indeed the case here,
		
		This would be
		A mistaken imagining,
		For the reason that

		There could be
		No possibility of
		Being essentially other.


[3388]
PHUNG POR TE DE LA BDAG NGO BO NYID KYIS BRTEN PA’I TSUL GYIS YOD PA MA YIN ZHING, BDAG LA YANG PHUNG PO DE RNAMS NGO BO NYID KYIS BRTEN PA’I TSUL GYIS YOD PA MIN TE,

Now the self is not something that exists in some manner of dependence, through some essence of its own, “in” the parts to the person; which is to say, upon these parts.  And neither are the parts to the person something which exists in some manner of dependency, through some essence of their own, upon the self.


[3389]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA PHUNG PO DANG BDAG ‘DIR NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I GZHAN NYID YOD NA, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RTEN DANG BRTEN PA’I [f. 232a] RTOG PA GNYIS PO ‘DIR ‘GYUR NA, RANG BZHIN GYIS GZHAN NYID DU GRUB PA DE MED PA DE’I PHYIR RTEN DANG BRTEN PAR NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA ‘DI PHYIN CI LOG GI RTOG PAS BZHAG PA TZAM STE,

And what is the reason why we can say this?  Suppose it were the case that the parts to the person and the self “here” (meaning, in a way in which they existed through some essence of their own) were perfectly separate from one another.  If these two ideas—of a basis and something relying upon that basis that existed through some nature of their own—were indeed the case here, then for the reason that there could be no possibility of their being essentially other than each other by nature, we can say that this essential existence of a basis and something relying upon this basis is a proposal that is established by nothing more than a mistaken imagining.


[3390]
DPER NA ‘JIG RTEN NA ‘KHAR GZHONG DANG ZHO GNYIS NGO BO THA DAD PA LA RTEN DANG BRTEN PA MTHONG BA LTAR PHUNG PO DANG BDAG GNYIS LA DE LTAR MTHONG BA MED PAS RTEN DANG BRTEN PA’I NGO BOR RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED DO,,

In the everyday world, for example, we can see an example of a basis and something relying upon that basis where some yogurt—and the metal dish that might hold that yogurt—are essentially separate entities.  We do not though see this sort of thing with the pair of the parts to the person and the self.  As such, it is not the case that there is a relationship here of a basis and what depends upon that basis existing through some essential nature of their own.


	[3391]
[VI.143]
Iṣṭo nātmā rūpavān nāsti yasmād
ātmā matvarthīya yogo hi nātaḥ,
Bhede gomān rūpavān apyabhede
tattvānyatve rūpato nātmanaḥ staḥ.

,BDAG NI GZUGS LDAN MI ‘DOD GANG PHYIR BDAG,
,YOD MIN DE PHYIR LDAN DON SBYOR BA MED,
,GZHAN NA GNAG LDAN GZHAN MIN GZUGS LDAN NA,
,BDAG NI GZUGS LAS DE NYID GZHAN NYID MED,

		We do not accept
		That the self is something
		That could possess form;

		Why we say so
		Is that there is no
		Possibility of the self;

		Therefore the point of
		The connection possessed
		By them is not something
		That could exist.

		Suppose it were
		To something being other:
		“He is possessed of a blackie.”

		Suppose he was possessed
		Of a physical form where
		There was no separate thing.

		The relationship of the self
		To the form is neither the same;
		Nor are they essentially different.


[3392]
PHUNG PO DANG LDAN PA NYID KYANG BDAG LA NGO BO NYID KYIS JI LTAR YOD PA MA YIN PA DE LTAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Here next we have an explanation of how the very possession of the parts to the person is not something that could ever exist with the self by its very nature.


[3393]
BDAG NI GZUGS KYI PHUNG PO DANG LDAN PA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAR MI ‘DOD DE, RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA BDAG PHUNG PO RNAMS LAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GCIG DANG THA DAD PA NI BKAG ZIN PAS YOD PA MIN PA DE’I PHYIR, BDAG PHUNG PO DANG LDAN PA’I SBYOR BA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED DE,

We do not then accept the idea that the self is something that could possess the heap of form in a way where this occurred through some nature of its own.  Our reason for saying this, why we say it’s so, is that there is no possibility of asserting that the self is either—by nature—one with or separate from the parts to the person; we have already disproved these possibilities.  Therefore the connection possessed by the self and the parts to the person is not something that could exist through any nature of its own.


[3394]
‘DI LTAR LDAN PA’I RKYEN YANG LHA SBYIN GNAG STE BA LANG DANG LDAN NO ZHES PA LTA BU NI, GZHAN NA STE NGO BO THA DAD PA LA SBYOR LA, 

The fact that we could have this kind of factor here is something similar to the way in which we say that “John is possessed of a blackie” (referring to a kind of dark-colored cow).  Which is to say, suppose we made the reference here to something being other, or essentially separate.


[3395]
LHA SBYIN GZUGS DANG LDAN ZHES PA LTA BU NI NGO BO GZHAN MIN PA LA SBYOR BA YIN NA, BDAG NI GZUGS LAS DE NYID DE GCIG DANG, GZHAN NYID DE THA DAD PA MED PAS, BDAG GZUGS DANG LDAN PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘DI YANG MI SRID DO,,

And then suppose we posed a connection where we said that “John is possessed of a physical form,” where there was no essentially separate thing.  The relationship of the self to the form is neither that they are essentially the same, or one; nor are they essentially different, where they are things distinct from each other.  As such, neither is it a possibility that the self could be possessed of form in a way that existed through some nature of its own.


[3396]
DE DAG GIS NI PHUNG PO LHAG MA BZHI DANG LDAN PA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA YANG BKAG PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

You should understand that the points here further serve to deny that the self could be possessed of any of the remaining four parts to the person in a way that existed in & of itself.



How destruction is mistaken

[3397]
GNYIS PA NI, DA NI SNGAR BKAG ZIN PA’I PHYOGS RNAMS BSDOMS TE BSTAN PAS ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BAS PHYIN CI LOG LA DMIGS PAS RNAM PAS ZHUGS PA’I GRANGS BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

This brings us to our second part from above, which is a summary presentation of the denials.  Which means that we will now set forth the whole collection of the positions that we have up to here denied: we will give an explanation enumerating the different ways in which the view of the collection of destruction utilizes an aspect where it focuses in a mistaken way.


	[3398]
[VI.144]
Rūpaṃ nātmā rūpavān naiva cātmā
rūpe nātmā rūpam ātmanyasac ca,
Skandhān evaṃ viddhi sarvāṃś caturdhā
viṃśaty aṃśā eta iṣṭāḥ svadṛṣṭeḥ.

,GZUGS BDAG MA YIN BDAG NI GZUGS LDAN MIN,
,GZUGS LA BDAG MED BDAG LA’ANG GZUGS YOD MIN,
,DE LTAR RNAM BZHIR PHUNG KUN SHES BYA STE,
,DE DAG BDAG TU LTA BA NYI SHUR ‘DOD,

		Form is not
		The self;

		The self is not
		Possessed of form;

		Form does not
		Possess the self;

		And the self does not
		Possess form.

		You should understand
		All the parts to the person
		Just as that, as four
		Different types.

		These are accepted
		As the twenty
		Views as a self.


[3399]
GZUGS NI BDAG MA YIN PA LA BDAG TU LTA BA DANG, [f. 232b] BDAG NI GZUGS DANG NGO BO NYID KYIS LDAN PA MIN PA LA DER LTA BA DANG, GZUGS LA BDAG DANG BDAG LA GZUGS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN PA LA DER LTA BA BZHI STE,

Let’s consider then these four: (1) the view that form is the self, even though it is not; (2) the view that the self is possessed of form, through some essence of its own, even though it is not; and the views that (3) either form possesses the self, or (4) the self possesses form, in a way that does not exist through some nature of its own.


[3400]
GZUGS PHUNG LA BSHAD PA DE LTAR ‘JIG LTAS LTA BA’I TSUL RNAM PA BZHIR TSOR BA LA SOGS PA’I PHUNG PO BZHI PO KUN LA BZHI BZHIR LTA BA SHES PAR BYA STE, DE DAG NI BDAG TU LTA BA ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA’I CHA NYI SHUR ‘DOD PA YIN NO,,

You should understand that—just as we have explained the case with the part of the person which is form—the view of destruction can be understand as being of four different types, with a view in four distinctions each for all of the four parts to the person such as feelings and the like.  These then are accepted as being the twenty different parts to the view of the collection of destruction as it views things as having a self.


[3401]
GAL TE BDAG GZUGS PHUNG DANG NGO BO THA DAD PAR LTA BA BSNAN NAS PHUNG PO RE RE LA RNAM PAR DPYAD PA LNGA LNGA SKABS SU BAB LA,

Someone may come with the following question—

Suppose we get to a point where we are engaging in five different examinations for each of the different parts to the person, having added the view that the self is essentially different from the part consisting of form.


[3402]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,PHUNG MIN PHUNG PO LAS GZHAN MIN,
,DE LA PHUNG MED DER DE MED,
,DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA PHUNG LDAN MIN,
,DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA GANG ZHIG YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS PA MA YIN NAM,

After all, doesn’t Wisdom state the following?

		They are not
		The parts to the person,

		Nor are they something
		Other than the parts.

		They have no parts,
		Nor are they there.

		Those Gone Thus
		Are not possessed of parts;

		Where could you ever find
		The Ones Gone Thus?


[3403]
DE’I PHYIR CHA NYER LNGAR ‘GYUR DGOS PA LA CHA NYI SHUR JI SKAD BRJOD CE NA,

As such, there should have been 25 different divisions here; why then do you mention but 20?


[3404]
‘JIG LTA’I CHA NYI SHU PO DE DAG NI MDO LAS RNAM PAR BZHAG LA, DE LTAR ‘JOG PA’I RGYU MTSAN NI SNGON DU PHUNG PO RNAMS MA BZUNG BAR ‘JIG LTAS BDAG TU MNGON PAR ZHEN PAR MI NUS PAS, RNAM PA BZHI BZHI’I SGO NAS PHUNG PO RNAMS LA DMIGS SHING BDAG LA ‘JUG GO

These twenty different divisions of the view of destruction are set forth in sutra.  The reason for positing them this way is that—without first holding to the parts to the person—the view of destruction would be unable to hold the strong belief in a self.  As such, we say that it focuses upon the parts to the person in four types each, and thus engages in the self.


[3405]
,DE’I PHYIR PHUNG PO RNAMS MA GTOGS PAR GZHAN DU BDAG TU ZHEN PA’I GZHI LNGA PA MU STEGS MA GTOGS PA LA MI ‘BYUNG BAS, CHA LNGA PA MA GSUNGS SO,,

As such, if we exclude the heaps, there is no other, fifth basis which one believes strongly is the self—that is, unless we include here the viewpoints of the River Schools.  This then is why no fifth part was described.


[3406]
RTZA SHE LAS PHYOGS GZHAN LNGA PA GSUNGS PA NI MU STEGS PA’I LUGS DGAG PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES BYA BAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

You can understand this from the statement that the fifth option mentioned in Wisdom “is a denial of the system of the River Schools.”


	[3407]
[VI.145]
,LTA RI BDAG MED RTOGS PA’I RDO RJE YIS,
,BCOM BDAG GANG DANG LHAN CIG ‘JIG ‘GYUR PA,
,’JIG TSOGS LTA RI LHUN STUG LA GNAS PA,
,RTZE MO MTHO BAR GYUR PA [211b] ‘DI DAG GO,

		The mountain of view
		Is destroyed with
		The diamond weapon
		
		Of realizing
		That no self exists.

		The self that was
		Will be destroyed
		Along with it.

		The high peaks
		That are found
		On the massive
		Central mountain

		Of the view
		Of the collection of
		Destruction are these [f. 211b].		
		

[3408]
DE LA ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA’I RI’I RTZE MO NYI SHU MTHO BA, YE SHES KYI RDO RJES BCOM NAS RGYUN DU ZHUGS PA’I ‘BRAS BU MNGON DU BYAS SO, ZHES GANG LUNG LAS GSUNGS PA NI,

Let’s consider then the statement in scripture which reads—

We take the diamond weapon of wisdom and use it to destroy the twenty lofty peaks of the mountain of the view of the collection of destruction; and with that, we bring about the spiritual goal of having entered the stream.


[3409]
[f. 233a] DMIGS PA NGA LA DMIGS NAS RNAM PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA’I RI BO ‘PHAGS PA’I YE SHES KYI RDO RJE MA BABS PAS,

And so let’s consider that mountain of the view of destruction which takes, as its object of focus, the “me” and maintains an aspect of it which holds it to exist through some nature of its own.  Here is what will happen, if we don’t manage to bring the diamond weapon of wisdom down upon it.


[3410]
NYIN RE ZHING NYON MONGS PA’I BRAG RDO ‘PHEL BA, ‘KHOR BA THOG MA MED NAS ‘BYUNG BA, DPANGS KHAMS GSUM DU MTHO BA, PHYOGS KYI NGOS MA LUS PA KHYAB PA, MA RIG PA’I GSER GYI SA GZHI LAS ‘THON PA,

With every day then the boulders of everything related to the negative emotions will increase.  The heights of the three realms—which have occurred here within the cycle of pain from time with no beginning—will grow ever taller, and spread in every direction.  They will tower up from the planet’s golden base, which itself represents misunderstanding.


[3411]
BDAG MED PA MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA’I YE SHES KYI RDO RJE YIS BCOM PA STE BSHIG PA NA, BCOM PA’I BDAG TU LTA BA GANG DANG LHAN CIG TU ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR BA,

Suppose though that we are able to destroy it—to smash it—with the diamond weapon of the wisdom which realizes, directly, that no self exists.  In this case, the view that holds to the self that was destroyed will be destroyed along with it.


[3412]
DE MA THAG TU BSHAD PA’I RTZA BA’I ‘JIG TSOGS LA LTA BA’I RI LHUN STUG PO LA GNAS PA’I RTZE MO MTHO BAR GYUR PA NYI SHU NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I PHUNG PO LNGA PO RE RE LA BZHI BZHIR BSHAD PA ‘DI DAG GO

Just after that, we see referenced the twenty high peaks that are found on the massive central mountain of the fundamental view of the collection of destruction.  These consist of the five parts to the person which, as we mentioned before, are each considered in four different ways.


[3413]
,’DIR ‘GREL PA’I ‘GYUR LAS, RTZE MO CHES MTHO BA GANG DAG DANG LHAN CIG ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR BA DE DAG NI RTZE MO YIN PAR SHES PAR BYA’O, ZHES ‘BYUNG YANG RTZA BA’I ‘GYUR LTAR, RTZA BA’I ‘JIG LTA DANG LHAN CIG CES ‘BYUNG BA LTAR BYA’O,,

In the translation of the autocommentary at this point we read, “You should understand that what are destroyed with the extremely high peaks are what are referred to as ‘peaks’ here.”  This should be read as we see it in the translation of the root text, where it says “along with the foundation form of the view of destruction.”


[3414]
DE YANG LHAN SKYES KYI ‘JIG LTA NGAR ‘DZIN SNGAR BSHAD PA’I NYI SHU PO GANG YANG MIN PAS, ‘JIG TSOGS LTA RI LHUN STUG LA GNAS PA, ZHES RTZE MO NYI SHU’I ‘JIG LTA RTZA BA’I ‘JIG LTA LA GNAS PAR GSUNGS SO,,

That is, grasping to a “me” as the innate form of the view of destruction is not represented by any of the twenty types described before.  As such, when we see the reference to what is “found on the massive central mountain of the view of the collection of destruction” here, the point being made is that the view of destruction in the form of the twenty peaks is resting on the view of destruction itself.
 

[3415]
GANG DANG LHAN CIG TU NYI SHU RGYUN ZHUGS KYIS SPANGS PA’I RTZA BA’I ‘JIG LTA YANG KUN BRTAGS YIN LA, DE YANG DE RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA TZAM LA MI BYED KYI, DE’I ‘DZIN STANGS ‘THAD LDAN DU GRUB MTHA’ NGAN PA LA BRTEN NAS ‘DZIN PA’I SA BON RGYUN ZHUGS KYIS SPANGS PA’O,,

The fundamental form of the view of destruction when we speak of how one who enters the stream eliminates its twenty concomitant forms, moreover, is a learned form.  And it moreover does not refer only to holding that things could exist by definition; rather, the stream enterer eliminates as well the seeds for that stance here—itself brought about by relying upon mistaken schools of thought—that how this view considers things must be correct.



Others on the substantial person

[3416]
BZHI PA LA GNYIS, PHYOGS SNGA MA [f. 233b] BRJOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Here is that fourth point, where we deny a substantial form of the person that would be neither itself nor something other than itself.  This comes in two parts: describing the position taken by the other party; and then disproving that position.


[3417]
DA NI ‘PHAGS PA MANG POS BKUR BA DAG GIS BRTAGS PA’I GANG ZAG RDZAS SU YOD PAR SMRA BA BSAL BA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

The Arya now turns to an explanation meant to clarify the position made up by the Widely Respected group, of a person who exists substantially.


	[3418]
[VI.146]
Icchantyeke pudgalaṃ dravya santaṃ
tattvānyatvānitya nityādyavācyam,
Ṣaḍ vijñāna jñeyatā ceṣyate’sya
so’haṃkārasyāśrayo hīṣyate ca.

,KHA CIG DE NYID GZHAN NYID RTAG MI RTAG,
,LA SOGS BRJOD MED GANG ZAG RDZAS YOD ‘DOD,
,RNAM SHES DRUG GI SHES BYAR DE ‘DOD CING,
,DE NI NGAR ‘DZIN GZHIR YANG ‘DOD PA YIN,

		Some people say
		It cannot be described
		As precisely those,

		Or something
		Perfectly different;

		Or as unchanging
		Or changing

		Or anything
		Of the like.

		They assert
		That the person
		Exists substantially,

		And they further assert
		That this is something
		Which is perceived
		By the six types
		Of consciousness;

		And they believe
That the same is
		The basis for the
		Tendency to hold
		To a “me.”


[3419]
RANG GI SDE PA MANG POS BKUR BA PA KHA CIG NI, PHUNG PO MA GTOGS DE ‘DZIN MA GRUB PHYIR, ZHES PA’I RIGS PAS GANG ZAG PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA MIN LA, PHUNG PO’I RANG BZHIN CAN YANG MIN TE, YIN NA BDAG DE SKYE ‘JIG DANG LDAN PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here then is the idea of some people who belong to the Widely Respected group.  They would reference the verse that includes, “Because you could never establish the capacity to hold to some that didn’t involve the parts,” and say that there is no person who is essentially separate from the parts to the person.  They would say as well that this is not something which possesses the nature of these parts; since if it were, then the self would be something which exhibited started & stopping.


[3420]
DE’I PHYIR BDAG GAM GANG ZAG NI PHUNG PO LAS DE NYID DANG GZHAN NYID DU BRJOD DU MED DO, ,DE BZHIN DU GANG ZAG NI RTAG PA DANG MI RTAG PA LA SOGS PA NYID DU YANG BRJOD DU MED DO,,

As such, they would say, the self or person cannot be described, relative to the parts to the person, as being precisely those parts themselves, or something perfectly different.  Just so, the person would be something that could never be described as either unchanging or changing, or anything exactly of the like.


[3421]
GANG ZAG DE RDZAS SU YOD PAR YANG ‘DOD DE, LAS GNYIS KYI BYED PA PO DANG, DE GNYIS KYI ‘BRAS BU BDE SDUG GI ZA BA PO NYID DU BRJOD PA’I PHYIR DANG, ‘KHOR BAR BCINGS PA DANG MYANG ‘DAS KYI SKABS SU THAR BA PO’AM GROL BA PO YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

They would also assert that the person is something that exists substantially.  This is because, first of all, it has been described as being precisely the one who commits the two types of karma; as well as the consumer of the results of these two—whether they be pleasure or pain.  It is also the one who is shackled to the circle of pain; and the one who achieves freedom—or, we can say, the one who achieves liberation—at the point of nirvana.


[3422]
BDAG DE RNAM SHES DRUG GI SHES BYAR YANG ‘DOD CING, BDAG DE NI NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I GZHI STE DMIGS PAR YANG ‘DOD PA YIN NO,,

They further assert that this self is something which is perceived by the six types of consciousness; and they believe that the same self is the basis—or the object of focus—for the tendency to hold to a “me.”



Disproving the substantial person

[3423]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second part here: disproving the position just described.


[3424]
GANG ZAG RDZAS YOD DU SMRA BA ‘DI YANG MI RIGS PA NYID DU BSHAD PA,

Now this assertion that the person exists in a substantial way is a perfectly mistaken explanation.


	[3425]
[VI.147]
Naivāvācyaṃ vastusat saṃpratītaṃ
yac cittasyāvācyatāṃ naiṣi rūpāt |
Ātmā kaścid vastusiddho yadi syān
nāvācyaḥ syāc cittavat siddharūpaḥ.

,GANG PHYIR GZUGS LAS SEMS BRJOD MED MI RTOGS,
,DNGOS YOD BRJOD MED RTOGS PA MA YIN NYID,
,GAL TE BDAG ‘GA’ DNGOS POR GRUB GYUR NA,
,SEMS LTAR GRUB DNGOS BRJOD DU MED MI ‘GYUR,

		For what reason?
		We don’t understand
		How the mind’s
		
		Relationship to form
		Cannot be described.

		This same idea
		Can never be described
		As things that exist
		As entitites.

		Suppose that
		There were some
		Possible cases
		Of the self

		That existed
		As entities.

		Entities that existed
		In a way similar
		To the mind

		Would have to be
		Indescribable.


[3426]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA GZUGS LAS SEMS DE NYID DANG GZHAN GANG DU YANG BRJOD DU MED PAR MI RTOGS PA STE MI ‘DOD PA LTAR, 

For what reason is this true?  We don’t understand how—which is to say, we don’t agree—that the mind’s relationship to form cannot be described either as it being precisely that form, or something other than that form.


[3427]
DNGOS PO STE RDZAS SU YOD PA RNAMS LA DE NYID DANG GZHAN NYID DU BRJOD DU MED PAR RTOGS PA MA YIN PA NYID DE, ‘DI LTAR GAL TE BDAG ‘GA’ ZHIG DNGOS POR TE RDZAS SU GRUB PAR GYUR NA, SEMS LTAR DU GRUB PA’I DNGOS PO SGO GNYIS GANG DU BRJOD DU MED PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

And let’s also consider this same idea that the mind can never be described either as the very same as, or as perfectly distinct from, things that exist as entities—which is to say, as substantial.  Because suppose that there were some possible cases of the self that existed as entities; which here means, in a substantial way.  In that scenario, entities that existed in a way similar to the mind would have to be indescribable, in either of the two senses.


[3428]
DE’I PHYIR TSIGS SU BCAD PA SNGA MAS BRJOD DU MED PA LA RDZAS SU [f. 234a] YOD PA MI SRID PAR BSTAN NAS, GANG ZAG BTAGS YOD DU BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

As such, the previous verse is indicating that it would be impossible for something that was indescribable to exist in a substantial way.  And then now we come to an explanation meant to show how the person exists as something labeled.



	[3429]
[VI.148]
Yaḥ skandhebhyo’vācyatāṃ yāta ātmā
sattvaṃ siddhaṃ svātmanā tasya mā gāḥ,
Vastu tvenāsiddha rūpo ghaṭas te
rūpādibhyo’vācyatāṃ yena yātaḥ.

,GANG PHYIR KHYOD BUM DNGOS POR MA GRUB PA’I,
,NGO BO GZUGS SOGS LAS BRJOD MED ‘GYUR BAS,
,BDAG GANG PHUNG PO LAS BRJOD MED ‘GYUR TE,
,RANG GIS YOD PAR GRUB PAR RTOGS MI BYA,

	What is the reason?
	The relationship
	Of your water pitcher—

	Which has an
	Essential nature
	Where it cannot exist
	As an entity—

	To form and the rest
	Is not something
	Which can be described.

	As such, that self
	Is something whose
	Relationship to

	The parts
	To the person
	Cannot be described.

	You cannot understand
	That it itself exists.


[3430]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR KHYOD KYI LTAR NA BUM PA RANG RKYA THUB PA’I DNGOS POR MA GRUB PA’I NGO BO DE RANG GI YAN LAG GI GZUGS SOGS LAS DE NYID DE GCIG DANG NGO BO THA DAD DU BRJOD DU MED PAR ‘GYUR BAR ‘DOD PAS,

And what is the reason why we can say that?  According to you, the relationship of a water pitcher—which has an essential nature where it cannot exist as an entity which stands of its own accord—to its parts of form and the rest is not something which can be described as being just that (the very same) or essentially different. 


[3431]
DE BZHIN DU BDAG GANG YIN PA DE YANG PHUNG PO LAS DE NYID DANG NGO BO THA DAD PA’I GZHAN NYID DU BRJOD DU MED PA’I BTAGS YOD DU ‘GYUR BA 

As such then we can say the same with that thing which is the self; that is, it is something imputed whose relationship to the parts of the person cannot be described as either being the very same as them, or being different in the sense of essentially separate from them.


[3432]
DE’I PHYIR GANG ZAG RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS YOD PAR GRUB PAR RTOGS PA STE GZUNG BAR MI BYA’O,,

As such, you cannot “understand”—which is to say, hold—that the person exists in & of itself: through some nature of its own.


[3433]
DE LTAR TSIGS SU BCAD PA GNYIS KYIS RDZAS SU YOD PA DGAG PA DANG, BTAGS YOD DU SGRUB PA NYE BAR BSTAN NAS, DA NI DE NYID DANG GZHAN GNYIS DNGOS PO’I RTEN NYID DU BRJOD NAS, RTEN DE MA YIN PA NYID KYIS BDAG RDZAS SU YOD PA ‘GOG PAR RTZOM PA,

As such then we have two verses which are indicating here that things cannot exist in any substantial manner; but can be established as existing by imputation.  Now then we will move on to undertaking our denial that the self could exist in a substantial way, as it does not in any way provide a basis, described as the very basis of things of things either as those things themselves, or as something other than them.


	[3434]
[VI.149]
Vijñānaṃ te svātmato’nanyad iṣṭaṃ
rūpādibhyo bhinna rūpaṃ mataṃ ca,
Vastunyete dve gatī nāma dṛṣṭe
nāstyātmāto vastu dharmair viyogāt.

,KHYOD KYI RNAM SHES RANG BDAG LAS GZHAN NI,
,MI ‘DOD GZUGS SOGS LAS GZHAN DNGOS ‘DOD CING,
,DNGOS LA RNAM PA DE GNYIS MTHONG ‘GYUR BA,
,DE PHYIR BDAG MED DNGOS CHOS DANG BRAL PHYIR,

		You would be
		Asserting that
		Your consciousness

		Was not something
		Different from
		Your self;

		And asserting
The position
That it was
No different entity

Than form
And the rest.

With entities
We see that things
Are two types;

For this reason,
The self cannot exist,

For it is devoid
Of the quality
Of an entity.


[3435]
GAL TE KHYOD KYI LTAR BDAG RDZAS SU YOD NA NI, KHYOD KYI RNAM SHES NI RANG GI BDAG NYID LAS GZHAN NI MIN PAR ‘DOD PA BZHIN DU, GANG ZAG KYANG NGES PAR RANG GI BDAG NYID LAS GZHAN MIN PAS DE NYID DU BRJOD DGOS SO,,

Suppose then that—as you would have it—the self existed substantially.  In this case, you would be asserting that your consciousness was not something different from your very own self.  Just so, the person too would with certainty be no different from your own perfect self; and you would have to describe it as such.


[3436]
YANG KHYOD KYI RNAM SHES GZUGS SOGS LAS GZHAN PA’I DNGOS POR ‘DOD PA BZHIN DU, GANG ZAG KYANG PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PAR BRJOD DGOS SO,,

So too if you were taking the position that your consciousness was no different entity than form and the rest, you would have to say that the person was something that was essentially different from the parts to the person.


[3437]
DNGOS PO LA GCIG DANG THA DAD KYI RNAM PA DE GNYIS NGES PAR MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR BA DE’I PHYIR BDAG RDZAS SU MED DE, DNGOS PO’I CHOS DE NYID DANG GZHAN GNYIS SU GRUB PA DANG BRAL BA’I PHYIR RO,,

And with entities we see that things are fixed at two types: either they are one & the same, or they are separate.  For this reason, the self cannot exist as a substantial entity, for it is devoid of existing either way: as the essence or quality of an entity itself, or as something other than it.



The seven extremes

[3438]
LNGA PA LA BZHI, BDAG MTHA’ BDUN DU MED KYANG [f. 234b] BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA SHING RTA DANG ‘DRA BAR BSTAN PA, SNGAR MA BSHAD PA’I PHYOGS LHAG MA GNYIS RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA, DE LTAR BSHAD PA LA GZHAN GYI RTZOD PA SPANG BA, MING GI THA SNYAD KYI DON GZHAN YANG GRUB PAR BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The fifth section here—explaining, with the use of a metaphor, how it is that we establish that the self is something labelled through dependence—has four parts of its own:

(1) a demonstration that, even though the self is devoid of the seven extremes, it is still similar to a wagon, in being labeled in dependence;

(2) an extended explanation of two additional positions which have not been covered so far;

(3) rejecting arguments by others concerning this way of explaining things; and

(4) a demonstration how there is another interpretation of the meaning of terms used as names.

Here then is the first of these.


	[3439]
[VI.150]
Nāhaṃkārasyāśrayo vastu tasmān
nānyaḥ skandhebhyo’pi na skandharūpaḥ,
Skandādhāro naiva naivaiṣa tadvān
skandhāṃs tūpādāya yātyeṣa siddhim.

,DE PHYIR NGAR ‘DZIN RTEN NI DNGOS PO MIN,
,PHUNG LAS GZHAN MIN PHUNG PO’I NGO BO MIN,
,PHUNG PO RTEN MIN ‘DI NI DE LDAN MIN,
,’DI NI PHUNG PO RNAMS BRTEN ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR,

	For that reason,
	The basis for
	Holding to some
	“Me” is not
	A substantial thing.

	It is not
	Something other
	Than the parts
	To the person.

	Neither is it
	The essence
	Of the parts
	To the person.

	Neither is it
	The basis;

	Neither is this
	Possessed of those.

	This is something
	That exists through
	Dependence upon
	The parts of the person.


[3440]
GANG GI PHYIR SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR RNAM PAR DPYAD PA NA GANG ZAG RDZAS SU YOD PA MI ‘THAD PA DE’I PHYIR NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I RTEN TE DMIGS PA NI, DNGOS PO STE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MIN TE,

Now if one does the examination as we have previously described it, we see that it is incorrect to say that the person exists substantially.  For that reason, (1) the basis—which is to say, the object of focus—for holding to some “me” is not something which is a substantial thing, which is to say, something that could exist through any nature of its own.


[3441]
RNAM PAR DPYAD PA NA BDAG NI PHUNG PO LAS GZHAN TE NGO BO THA DAD PA MIN LA, PHUNG PO’I NGO BO TSOGS PA DANG YA GYAL GANG YANG BDAG MIN PA DANG,

If we really investigate the matter, we see (2) that the self is not something other than the parts to the person; which is to say, something essentially different from them.  But (3) neither is the “essence” of the parts to the person—which is say, the collection of these parts, or (4) any one component of that collection—the self either.


[3442]
BDAG PHUNG PO RNAMS KYI RTEN DANG, BDAG ‘DI LA PHUNG PO RTEN DU YOD PA YANG MIN ZHING, BDAG ‘DI NI PHUNG PO DE RNAMS DANG LDAN PA’ANG NGO BO NYID KYIS YOD PA MIN NO,,

But (5) neither is the self the basis for the parts to the person; (6) nor do those parts use this self as something that they rely upon.  (7) Neither is it the case that we can say that this self is possessed of those parts to the person—at least in a way that exists in & of itself.


[3443]
DE’I PHYIR RANG GI SDE PA GANG DAG BDAG BTAGS PAR YOD CES PA’AM, BDAG DON DAM PAR MA DMIGS PAR ‘DOD PAS KYANG RUNG STE JI SKAD SMRAS PA’I RNAM PAS BDAG KHAS BLANG BAR MI BYA’O ZHES BSHAD PA NI, BDAG ‘DI NI PHUNG PO RNAMS LA BRTEN NAS GRUB PAR ‘GYUR BA’O,,

As such, it is appropriate for any of our own groups to assert either that the self is something that exists as labeled; or to say that it is not something which exists in an ultimate manner.  That is, when we say that we cannot accept a self that exists in any of the different aspects described above, what we are saying is that this “self” is something that exists through dependence upon the parts of the person.


[3444]
JI LTAR ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS ‘DI ‘BYUNG ZHES BYA BA ‘DI TZAM ZHIG KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA’I RNAM PAR BZHAG PA MA CHAD PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR KHAS LEN PA NA, RGYU MED SOGS BZHI LAS SKYE BA MI ‘DOD PA DE BZHIN DU,

And so suppose that we simply state our case as follows: “This has happened, depending on that other thing.”  With this, we avoid discounting the description of a reality which is deceptive.  And when this is our position, we avoid accepting the idea that things could arise through any of the four options of having no cause at all, and so on.


[3445]
BDAG GI SKABS ‘DIR YANG PHUNG PO LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PAR ‘DOD PA NA, JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I SKYON DANG LDAN PA’I PHYOGS SNGA BSAL NAS, PHUNG PO RNAMS LA BRTEN NAS GDAGS PA ZHES BYA BA ‘DI TZAM ZHIG ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD RNAM PAR GNAS PAR BYA BA’I [f. 235a] PHYIR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA STE, BDAG TU THA SNYAD BTAGS PA BSNYON MI NUS PAR MTHONG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

If in the present context then we accept the idea that the self is something ascribed on the basis of the parts to the person, we are able to banish those positions of other parties, with all their problems.  All we simply need to agree to is that “it is labeled on the basis of the parts to the person,” and then we can keep all the normal expressions of the world.  That is, by this time we have seen that no one can succeed in speaking against the idea that the self is just something labeled in terms.


	[3446]
[VI.151]
Svāṅgebhya iṣṭo na ratho yathānyo
na cāpyananyo na ca nāma tadvān,
Nāṅgeṣu nāṅgānyapi tatra nāpi
saṃghāta mātraṃ na ca sanniveśaḥ.

,SHING RTA RANG YAN LAG LAS GZHAN ‘DOD MIN,
,GZHAN MIN MA YIN DE LDAN YANG MIN ZHING,
,YAN LAG LA MIN YAN LAG DAG DER MIN,
,’DUS PA TZAM MIN DBYIBS MIN JI BZHIN NO,

		We are not saying
		That a wagon
		Is other than
		Its component parts.

		Neither are we
		Saying that
		It could be
		The other;

		Neither that
		It is possessed
		Of those,

		Or upon its
		Component parts,

		Or that the
		Component parts
		Are there;

		Neither that
		It is the 
		Simple collection,
		Or the outline.

		All this applies.


[3447]
BDAG BTAGS PA TZAM DU GRUB PAR BYA BA’I DON DU JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I DON NYID GSAL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, PHYI ROL GYI DPE STON CING BSHAD PA,

The next section here is presented in order to make even more clear the point we have just made—with an eye towards establishing that the self is only something which exists as labeled.  Towards that end, we present and then explain a metaphor from the normal, outside world.


[3448]
SHING RTA RANG GI YAN LAG LAS DON GZHAN DU ‘DOD PA MIN LA, GZHAN MIN TE GCIG TU YANG GRUB PA MA YIN PA DANG, PHUNG PO DE DANG LDAN PA DANG, YAN LAG LA PHAR BRTEN PA DANG, YAN LAG DAG BDAG DER BRTEN PA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN PA DANG, YAN LAG ‘DUS PA TZAM DANG YAN LAG GI DBYIBS MIN PA JI LTA BA DE BZHIN DU, BDAG DANG PHUNG PO GNYIS KYANG DE BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

That is, (1) we are not saying that a wagon is something other than its component parts.  But (2) neither are we saying that it could be the other: that it could exist as one and the same as these parts.  And neither are we saying (3) that the self is possessed of those parts to the person; or (4) that it depends out upon its component parts; or (5) that the component parts depend there upon the self—when we are talking about each of these possibilities existing through some nature of its own.  Neither are we saying (6) that the wagon is the simple collection of its component parts, or (7) that it consists of the outline of the parts put together.  Which is to say, one should understand that all this applies as well to the pair of the self and the parts to the person.



Denying the collection
is the wagon

[3449]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON, RIGS PA DE GZHAN LA KHA SPO BA’O,,

Which brings us to our second part from before: an extended explanation of two additional positions which have not been covered so far.  This we cover in two sections: the actual point, and then applying this logic to other cases.


[3450]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, TSOGS PA SHING RTAR ‘DOD PA DGAG, DBYIBS TZAM SHING RTAR ‘DOD PA DGAG PA’O,  ,DANG PO NI,

The first section itself includes two points: denying the position that the collection constitutes the wagon; and then denying the position that the outline itself could be the wagon.  Here is the first of these.


[3451]
PHYOGS SNGA MA LNGA NI SNGAR BSTAN ZIN PAS ‘DIR TSOGS PA’I PHYOGS DANG, DBYIBS KYI PHYOGS GNYIS SHING RTA YIN PA ‘GOG PA NI BSGRUB PAR BYA DGOS PAS DE DAG STON PA BRTZAM PAR BYA STE,

We have finished then presenting the first five of the positions indicated; as such, the time has come for us to establish how we deny first the idea that collection could be the wagon; and then secondly the idea that the outline could be the wagon.  Here is how we start with that.


	[3452]
[VI.152]
Saṃhāta mātraṃ hi ratho yadi syāt
kūṭasthiteṣveva bhaved rathatvam,
Saṃsthāna mātraṃ ca ratho na yuktaḥ
santyaṅgināṅgāni vinā na yasmād.

,GAL TE TSOGS TZAM SHING RTAR ‘GYUR NA NI,
,SIL BUR GNAS LA SHING RTA NYID YOD ‘GYUR,
,GANG PHYIR YAN LAG CAN MED YAN LAG DAG,
,MED PAS DBYIBS TZAM SHING RTAR RIGS PA’ANG MIN,

		Suppose it were the case
		That the simple collection
		Were the wagon.

		In that case then,
		When piled together,
		That too would have to be
		A perfect wagon.

Why is that the case?
If the whole which incorporates
The various component parts
Is absent, then the 
Component parts themselves
Are also absent.

It would not be logical,
Either, to say that
The simple outline of
The component parts
Was the wagon.


[3453]
GAL TE SHING RTA’I YAN LAG TSOGS TZAM SHING RTAR ‘GYUR NA NI, SHING RTA BSHIG PA’I YAN LAG GSIL BUR GNAS PA TSOGS PA LA YANG SHING RTA NYID YOD PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Suppose it were the case that the simple collection of the component parts of the wagon were the wagon.  In that case, then if we were to take the wagon apart and pile together all its separate component parts, then that too would have to be a perfect wagon.


[3454]
YAN LAG GI TSOGS PA RANG GI CHA CAN YIN PA ‘GOG PA ‘DI SNGAR BSHAD ZIN KYANG ‘DIR BKOD PA NI, SNGAR BSTAN PA LAS SKYON GZHAN BSTAN PA’I PHYIR YIN NO,,

Now we have already finished, earlier on, disproving the idea that collection of component parts constitutes their whole.  The reason we return to this discussion at this juncture is to point out still other problems with the concept than those we covered earlier.


[3455]
SKYON GZHAN YANG YOD DE, RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR YAN LAG CAN MED NA, YAN LAG DAG KYANG MED PA DE’I PHYIR YAN LAG [f. 235b] RNAMS MED PAR ‘GYUR TE, SHING RTA LA YAN LAG CAN MED PAR RANG GI SDE PA DE DAG GIS KHAS BLANGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And so we can say that there are additional issues here.  And why is that the case?  If the whole which incorporates the various component parts is absent, then the component parts themselves are also absent—these parts then would no longer exist.  And that’s because these particular members of our own school would accept the idea that there is no whole of the composite parts, with a wagon.


[3456]
DE DAG GIS KYANG YAN LAG TSOGS PA CHA SHAS CAN DANG, YAN LAG RNAMS CHA SHAS SU ‘DOD CING, DE BZHIN DU YAN LAG DANG YAN LAG CAN DU’ANG ‘DOD PAS, YAN LAG CAN MED PAR KHAS MA BLANGS SO SNYAM NA,

Now suppose that you were to think to yourself as follows—

But the fact is that they do believe that the collection of the component parts is the whole of the parts; and that the component parts here are the constitutent parts of the whole.  So too, they accept the idea of component parts and the whole of the component parts.  As such, it is not true that they believe that there is no whole composed of component parts.


[3457]
SKYON MED DE RANG GI LUGS NI PHUNG PO’I YA GYAL DANG TSOGS PA GNYIS KA NYE BAR BLANG BYA YIN PAS, DE NYE BAR LEN PA POR MI ‘DOD PA BZHIN DU,

And yet there is no such problem.  Even in our own system, we believe that both the component pieces of the parts to the person, and the collection of these pieces, is something that we take on; and that therefore these cannot constitute the one that does the taking on.


[3458]
SHING RTA’I YAN LAG RE RE BA DANG TSOGS PA GNYIS KA YAN LAG TU ‘JOG GI ,YAN LAG CAN DU MI ‘JOG LA, SDE PA DE DAG GIS KYANG TSOGS PA MIN PA’I YAN LAG CAN MI ‘DOD PA’I PHYIR DANG, DE YANG ‘GOG PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Just so, both the individual component parts to the wagon and the collection of these parts can all be accepted as components; but cannot be accepted as what possesses the components.  And even those groups as well would refuse to agree to any whole of the component parts which was not a collection of those parts.  They would, further, deny such a thing.


[3459]
‘ANG GI SGRA NI DNGOS SU MA BRJOD PA’I TSOGS PA BSDU BA’I DON TE, SDOD TSUL NI YAN LAG GI DBYIBS TZAM YANG SHING RTAR RIGS PA MIN LA, TSOGS PA TZAM PO YANG MI RIGS SO ZHES SHES PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU’O,,

The phrase “either” in the root text here is meant to include the collection, even though that is not directly mentioned.  The way this would be present is that it would not be logical, either, to say that the simple outline of the component parts was the wagon.  Neither would the simple collection itself be logical.  This is what we are meant to understand from the use of the phrase.



Denying that the outline
is the wagon

[3460]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: denying the position that the outline itself could be the wagon.


	[3461]
[VI.153]
Saṃsthānam aṅgeṣu yathā purābhūt
pratyekaśas te rathatāṃ gateṣu,
Tathaiva cen nāsti ratho’dhunāpi
viśliṣṭa bhūteṣu yathaiva teṣu.

,KHYOD DBYIBS YAN LAG RE RE SNGAR YOD GYUR,
,JI BZHIN SHING RTAR GTOGS LA’ANG DE BZHIN NO,
,BYE BAR GYUR PA DE DAG LA JI LTAR,
,DE {%DA} LTAR YANG NI SHING RTA YOD MA YIN,

		Your outline
		And each separate
		Component part
		As they existed prior,

		And after they
		Have been incorporated
		Into the wagon,

		Would be as well
		Just the same way.

		It would be there
		In those separated;

		Just so, the wagon
Would no longer
Be something that
Was there now.


[3462]
GZHAN YANG GAL TE KHYOD SHING RTA’I DBYIBS TZAM ZHIG SHING RTAR ‘DOD NA, DBYIBS DE YAN LAG RE RE BA DAG GI YIN NAM, TSOGS PA’I YIN PAR RTOG GRANG,

Moreover, let’s say that you agree to the idea that the outline of the wagon alone is the wagon.  And so we ask you: Is it that you think that outline is something that belongs to each of the component parts, individually?  Or does it belong to the collection of the parts?


[3463]
DANG PO LTAR NA SNGAR MA BSGRIGS PA’I DBYIBS KYI KHYAD PAR MA BTANG BA DAG GI’AM, SNGAR GYI DBYIBS KYI KHYAD PAR BTANG BA DAG GI DBYIBS YIN, DE LA GAL TE DANG PO LTAR ‘DOD PA’ANG DE MI RIGS SO,,

If you agree to the first option, then we ask you another question.  Is it that the outline belongs to these component parts as their shape was characterized prior to the point at which the wagon was assembled, or after they had already relinquished that shape?  We assert further that—if you assert that the former is the case—your position is mistaken.


[3464]
CI’I PHYIR ZHE NA, KHYOD KYI LTAR NA SHING RTA’I ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA’I YAN LAG RE RE LA SNGAR MA BSGRIGS PA’I DUS SU DBYIBS JI LTAR YOD PAR GYUR PA BZHIN DU, PHYIS BSGRIGS TE SHING RTAR RTOGS {%GTOGS} PA STE GRUB PA’I DUS SU’ANG SNGA [f. 236a] MA DE BZHIN DU YOD PA YIN NA,

And why is that?  According to you, we should first consider the shape of each separate component part of the wagon—the wheels and all the rest—as they existed prior to the point that they were assembled into the wagon.  And then their shape after they have been incorporated into the wagon—that is, after the wagon has been completed—should as well be something that exists in just the same way as it was before.


[3465]
MA BSGRIGS PA’I BYE BAR GYUR PA’I YAN LAG DE DAG LA JI LTAR SHING RTA YOD PA MIN PA BZHIN DU, DA LTAR YAN LAG RNAMS BSGRIGS PA’I TSE YANG NI SHING RTA YOD PA MA YIN PAR ‘GYUR TE,

If that were indeed the case, then there wouldn’t be any reason why the wagon would not be there in those separated parts, when they were still to be assembled.  And just so, by the same token, the wagon would no longer be something that was there now that the component parts have been put together.


[3466]
YAN LAG SO SO BA’I DBYIBS TZAM LA KHYOD SHING RTAR ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR DANG, SNGA PHYI’I YAN LAG SO SO BA’I DBYIBS LA KHYAD PAR MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And that’s because you have posited no more than the shape of each of the separate, component parts as being the wagon—and there’s no difference in the shape of each of these parts, before or after.


	[3467]
[VI.154]
Saṃsthāna bhedo yadi cādhunāsti
cakrādi kasyeha rathatvakāle,
Gṛhyeta nāmaiṣa na caitad asti
saṃsthāna mātraṃ na ratho’sti tasmāt.

,DA LTA GAL TE SHING RTA NYID DUS ‘DIR,
,’PHANG LO SOGS LA DBYIBS THA DAD YOD NA,
,’DI GZUNG ‘GYUR NA DE YANG YOD MIN TE,
,DE PHYIR DBYIBS TZAM SHING RTAR YOD MA YIN,

		Suppose we refer
		To that point
		In time now
		Of the wagon itself;

		There would be
Separate shapes
Of the wheels & the rest;

And suppose that
These were held.

This though
Could never be,
And for this reason
It is not the case

That the simple shape
Could exist as
The wagon itself.	


[3468]
CI STE PHYOGS GNYIS PA STE DBYIBS KYI KHYAD PAR SNGA MA DANG MI ‘DRA BA GZHAN ZHIG PHYIS ‘BYUNG BA DE SHING RTAR ‘GYUR NA,

And suppose then that you swing to the second position, asserting that an alternate shape differing from the original one has materialized later on, and become the wagon.


[3469]
GAL TE DA LTA SHING RTA NYID DU GRUB PA’I DUS ‘DIR ‘PHANG LO DANG LA SOGS PAS SROG SHING DANG, GZER BU LA SOGS PA SHING RTA’I YAN LAG RNAMS KYI DBYIBS KYI KHYAD PAR SO SOR LHAM PA STE GRU BZHI DANG, RING PO DANG ZLUM PO LA SOGS PA’I DBYIBS SNGAR MA BSGRIGS PA’I DUS DANG, MI MTHUN PA’I THA DAD PA YOD NA,

Suppose then we refer to that point in time now when the wagon itself is already completed, and consider the particular of the shape of the wheels & “the rest”—which would include things like the axle, or the pins that hold the wagon together, or other things of the like.  There would be, say, things that were rectangular or squarish, or long, or rounded, or any other kind of shape that the components might have had before they were assembled together.  These shapes would be separate, inconsistent with each other.


[3470]
YAN LAG SO SO’I DBYIBS MI MTHUN PA ‘DI MIG GI SHES PAS GZUNG DU YOD PAR ‘GYUR NA, DE YANG YOD PA MIN TE, DE’I PHYIR YAN LAG SO SO’I DBYIBS TZAM SHING RTAR YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

And suppose that each of these separate, inconsistent shapes then were to serve as what were held by visual awareness, and so on.  This though could never be; and for this reason it is not the case that the simple shape of each of the individual, component parts could exist as the wagon itself.


[3471]
CI STE ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA’I YAN LAG BSGRIGS PA’I TSOGS PA RNAMS KYI DBYIBS KHYAD PAR BA SHING RTAR ‘JOG GO SNYAM NA,

Suppose now that you think to yourself:

It is possible though that we establish the wagon as the collection of the wheels and other components, once they are assembled together.


[3472]
DE YANG MI RIGS SO ZHES BSHAD PA, GAL TE TSOGS PA ZHES BYA BA DNGOS PO STE RDZAS SU YOD PA CUNG ZAD CIG YOD NA NI, DE LA BRTEN PA CAN GYI DBYIBS SU GDAGS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And what we’re explaining here is that this approach is incorrect.  That is,

Suppose that what you are referring to as the “collection” existed in the least bit in a material way—which is to say, substantially.  In that case, we would be labelling the outline that relied upon it using it as the basis.


[3473]
YAN LAG TSOGS PA ZHES BYA BA RDZAS SU YOD PA CUNG ZAD KYANG MED DO,,

In this case, there would not be the slightest existence of anything we referred to as “the collection of the component parts” which existed in a substantial manner.


	[3474]
[VI.155]
Na cāṅga vṛndasya sa saṃniveśo
vṛndaṃ na kiṃcit tava yena nāma,
Na nāma kiṃcit khalu yat kathaṃ tat
saṃsthānam āśritya bhaviṣyatīha.

,GANG PHYIR KHYOD KYI TSOGS PA CANG MED PAS,
,DBYIBS DE YAN LAG TSOGS KYI MA YIN NA,
,GANG ZHIG CI YANG MA YIN DE BRTEN NAS,
,’DIR NI DBYIBS SU LTA ZHIG JI LTAR ‘GYUR,

		And why would that
		Be the case?

		According to you,
		There would be
		No collection at all.
		
		As such, the outline
		Is not something of
The collection of
		The component parts.

		How then could it
		Ever be the case
		That here something that
		Wasn’t anything at all

		Could be the outline
		Which provided
		The basis?		


[3475]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR KHYOD KYI LTAR NA TSOGS PA CANG MED PA STE CUNG ZAD KYANG RDZAS YOD DU MED PAS, DBYIBS [f. 236b] DE YAN LAG TSOGS PA GDAGS GZHIR BYAS PA LA BRTEN NAS ‘DOGS PA MA YIN TE,

And why, for what reason, would that be the case?  According to you, there would be no collection at all; which is to say, not the slightest thing that existed in a substantial way.  As such, the outline is not something which is ascribed on the basis of using the collection of the component parts as the basis of what we give the label.


[3476]
‘DI ‘DRA BA’I BTAGS YOD RNAMS NI RDZAS YOD RTEN DU BYAS PA KHO NAR KHYOD KYIS KHAS BLANGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, YAN LAG TSOGS PA YANG BTAGS YOD DU KHAS BLANGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And that’s because what you say is that these kinds of labeled things can only have a basis which exists substantially.  And you also say that the collection of the component parts is as well something that exists through labels.


[3477]
DE’I PHYIR GANG ZHIG CI YANG MA YIN PA STE CUNG ZAD KYANG RDZAS SU YOD PA MA YIN PA DE GDAGS GZHIR BYAS PA LA BRTEN NAS, SHING RTA’I SKABS ‘DIR NI SHING RTAR ‘JOG PA’I DBYIBS SU LTA ZHIG JI LTAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR RO,,

How then could it ever be the case that—here at the point of the wagon—there could ever be something that we said was the outline which were established as being the wagon, when you are talking about something that wasn’t anything at all; which is to say, which did not have the slightest existence as something substantial, and which provided the basis for the labeling of the wagon?


[3478]
‘DIR PHA ROL POS BTAGS YOD KYI DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG RKYA THUB PA’I RDZAS YOD RE GDAGS GZHIR YOD PA LA BRTEN NAS ‘DOGS PAR KHAS LEN ZHING, TSOGS PA DANG DBYIBS GNYIS KA YANG BTAGS YOD DU ‘DOD PAS, 

Here what the other side is accepting is that entities which exist in a labeled way are given their labels based upon the presence of something serving as the basis of the label which also exists in substantially, in a self-standing way.  They would also accept that both the collection of the component parts, and the outline, were both things that existed through the labeling process.


[3479]
TSOGS PA DBYIBS KYI GDAGS GZHIR ‘DOD NA ‘GAL BA TZAM LAS MA MDZAD KYANG, SKYES BU’I KHA DOG SKYES BUR ‘JOG TU MI RUNG BA BZHIN DU, SHING RTA LA YANG DE’I KHA DOG DANG DBYIBS GANG YANG SHING RTAR GZHAG TU MI RUNG STE, DE GNYIS NI SHING RTA’I NYE BAR BLANG BYA YIN PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA LA GO BAR BYA’O,,

Taking the position that the collection of the parts is the basis that we label the outline is not in itself to commit a contradiction; but still it would be incorrect to say that the colors of a person were the person themselves.  Similarly, it is inappropriate to say—in the case of a wagon—that the colors & shapes of the wagon are what we establish as the wagon.  And that’s because these two are what the wagon subsumes.  This last is something that one must come to understand.



Applying the same logic

[3480]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second part from before, which is applying this same logic to other cases.


[3481]
CI STE TSOGS PA MI BDEN PA BTAGS YOD YIN DU ZIN KYANG, DE LA BRTEN NAS MI BDEN PA STE BTAGS YOD KYI DBYIBS SU ‘GYUR RO ZHES ‘DOD NA,

Suppose then that one were to take the following position:

Let’s say then that, to start with, we agree that the collection of the component parts is something unreal: something simply labeled what it is.  We say though that there would be a kind of unreal thing that would depend upon it: an outline that was itself labeled.


	[3482]
[VI.156]
Yatheṣṭam etat tava tadvad eva
hetor asatyasya samāśrayeṇa,
Asatya rūpaṃ khalu kārya jātam
utpadyate sarvam apītyavaihi.

,KHYOD KYI ‘DI NI JI LTAR ‘DOD DE [212a] LTAR,
,MI BDEN PA YI RGYU LA BRTEN BYAS NAS,
,’BRAS BU’I RNAM PA MI BDEN RANG BZHIN CAN,
,THAMS CAD KYANG NI SKYE BAR SHES PAR GYIS,

	What you are proposing
	Is that in this case
	There is another idea
	Which holds [f. 212a],

	Which is that
	Things possess
	A nature of
	The unreal aspect
	Of a result,

	Because they have
	Depended upon
Causes which are
Themselves unreal.

And we are to
Understand that
All of them
Do their growing.


[3483]
KHYOD KYIS TSOGS PA BTAGS YOD LA BRTEN NAS DBYIBS BTAGS YOD ‘JOG PA ‘DI NI JI LTAR ‘DOD PA DE LTAR DU, MA RIG PA DANG SA BON LTA BU’I MI BDEN PA YI RGYU LA BRTEN PAR BYAS NAS, ‘DU BYED DANG MYU GU LTA BU ‘BRAS BU’I RNAM PA MI BDEN PA’I RANG BZHIN NAM NGO BO CAN RNAMS SKYE BAR SHES PAR BYA LA,

And so what you are proposing is that there is an outline which is labeled, and which itself depends upon a collection of parts which is labeled.  In this case there is another idea which holds, which is that—in the very same way—we are to understand that things like fresh karma and sprouts possess a nature or essence of the unreal aspect of a result, all because they have depended upon causes such as misunderstanding and seeds which are themselves unreal.


[3484]
DE BZHIN DU DE LAS GZHAN PA RGYU DANG ‘BRAS [f. 237a] BU’I NGO BO MI BDEN PA’I RANG BZHIN CAN THAMS CAD KYANG NI SKYE BAR SHES PAR BYA STE,

And we are to understand that—in the very same manner—all causes and results other than these, which possess a nature of being unreal in their essence, do their growing.


	[3485]
[VI.157]
Etena rūpādiṣu kumbha buddhis
tathāsthiteṣvityapi naiva yuktam,
Rūpādayaś cāpi na santyajātās
teṣāṃ na saṃsthānam ato’pi yuktam.

,’DIS NI GZUGS SOGS DE LTAR GNAS RNAMS LA,
,BUM BLO ZHES BYA’ANG RIGS PA MA YIN NYID,
,SKYE BA MED PAS GZUGS SOGS KYANG YOD MIN,
,DE YI PHYIR YANG DE DAG DBYIBS MI RIGS,

	But what’s the point?
	Visible form and the rest
	Are staying in that way;

	And they say we can
	Conceive of this
	As the vase—

	This as well can
	Only be incorrect.

	There exists no arisal;
	As such, neither form
	Nor the rest exist.

	For the same reason,
	It would be incorrect
	To say that these
	Could be the shape.


[3486]
‘BAD RTZOL BRGYA PHRAG BYAS KYANG GANG GI SHA BZA’ BAR MI NUS PA, DNGOS PO GRIB MA’I RI DVAGS LTA BU BRDZUN PA LA BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA DON MED PA ‘DIS NI CI ZHIG BYA

Now you can try as hard as you want to, in a thousand different ways, to make a meal of fake deer: that is, referring to the shadow of a deer.  But what’s the point of this meaningless exercise, of grasping to something false as being real?


[3487]
DE LA RANG GI SDE PA MANG POS BUM PA’I GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I RDUL BRGYAD DE LTAR ‘DAB ‘BYOR DU GNAS PA’I TSOGS PA RNAMS BUM PA YIN PAS, DE LA BUM PA’I BLOR ‘GYUR RO ZHES SMRA BA DE YANG SHING RTA’I DPE ‘DIS BSAL BAS NA DE NI RIGS PA MA YIN PA NYID DO,,

On this point, many in our own schools start by pointing out that a vase consists of a collection of the eight different particles—the visible form and the rest of the vase—that are staying in that configuration, meaning glued together in that way.  And then, they would say, we can conceive of this collection as the vase itself.  This opinion as well though can only be incorrect, since it is disproven by the example of the wagon.


[3488]
GZHAN YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PAR SNGAR BSHAD ZIN PAS GZUGS SOGS KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN NO,,

Moreover, we have already finished explaining, earlier, how there exists no arisal of a thing through some nature of its own; as such, neither form nor the rest are things that could exist through some nature of their own.


[3489]
DE YI PHYIR YANG RDZAS SU YOD PA’I NYE BAR LEN PA CAN DU ‘DOD PA BUM PA LA SOGS PA MI RIGS PAS, BUM PA LA SOGS PA DE DAG GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I DBYIBS KYI KHYAD PAR DU MI RIGS SO,,

For the same reason, we would have to say that it is illogical to assert that vases or the like could be things that take in their parts and exist in a substantial manner.  As such, it would be incorrect to say that these entities such as a vase or the like could be considered the feature of shape possessed by their form and the like.



Rejecting arguments
against the explanation

[3490]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third point from before, which is rejecting arguments by others concerning this way of explaining things.


[3491]
‘DIR SMRAS PA GAL TE ‘O NA SHING RTA ‘DI’I BTAGS DON, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I TSUL GYIS RNAM PA BDUN DU BTZAL BA NA, YOD PA MA YIN PA DE’I TSE SHING RTA MED PAR ‘GYUR BAS, SHING RTAS ‘JIG RTEN NA THA SNYAD ‘DOGS PA DE RGYUN CHAD PAR ‘GYUR NA,

Here then is what people say:

Well now, suppose we do look for the thing that we label with the name “wagon,” in the seven different ways laid out before.  When we thus find that this labeled object doesn’t exist, then the wagon itself cannot exist.  And that means then that the very act in the world of using the name “wagon” to refer to something is obviated.


[3492]
DE MI ‘THAD DE, SHING RTA ‘ON CIG NYOS SHIG ,’CHOS SHIG CES BYA BA LA SOGS PA BYA DGOS PAR MTHONG BA YANG YIN NO, ,DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA’I PHYIR NA SHING RTA LA SOGS PA NI YOD DO ZHE NA,

This though cannot be correct, for we do see that there are necessarily acts reflected in expressions such as “You should bring the wagon,” or “You should fix the wagon,” and so forth.  As such—simply because they are things that are known here in the world—we would have to say that wagons and the like certainly do exist.


[3493]
NYES PA ‘DI NI RANG CAG GNYIS KYI NANG NAS KHYOD KHO NA LA ‘JUG PAR ‘GYUR BAS, NGED KYIS KHYED LA DGOD PAR BYA BA YIN NO,,

The fact though is that the problem you have raised is something that only applies—from between the two of us here—to you!  As such, I will have to turn this around on you.


[3494]
JI LTAR YIN SNYAM NA, KHYOD [f. 237b] KYIS SHING RTA’I BTAGS DON RNAM PAR DPYAD PA STE BTZAL NAS, SHING RTA ‘JOG PAR BYED CING BTAGS DON MA BTZAL BAR ‘GRUB PA’I THABS GZHAN KHAS MA BLANGS PA’I PHYIR DANG, 

And how would that work?  Let’s say that you are examining—or seeking—that thing which we label “wagon.”  The fact is that you have failed to express your support for any method of establishing the wagon other than looking at how we say something is a wagon, and looking for what it is that we’ve called “wagon.”


[3495]
BTAGS DON RNAM PA BDUN DU BTZAL BA NA, SHING RTA ‘ON CIG CES BYA BA SOGS KYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD RNAMS KHYOD LA JI LTAR ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR RO,,

Moreover, when we look—in seven different ways—for what it is that we label “the wagon,” we don’t see how it is that this can be established according to you, as the terms are applied in the way of the world at large, with expressions such as “bring the wagon” and the like.  In fact, it could not be established.


[3496]
RTZOD PA DE LA BSTAN BCOS MDZAD PAS NI LAN DE LTAR ‘DEBS LA, DA LTA’I BOD KYI THAL ‘GYUR BAR ‘DOD PA RNAMS NI, RNAM PA BDUN DU BTZAL BAS MA RNYED NA SHING RTA ‘JOG MI NUS SO ZHES RTZOD PA DE NYID DBU MA PA’I LUGS SU SMRA STE,

This then is how the author of our autocommentary replies to this argument.  But certain people living nowadays here in Tibet—who consider themselves followers of the Consequence group within the Middle Way school—would argue that when we seek the wagon in those seven classic ways and fail to find it, then no wagon at all can be established.  They would go further and say that this is the classic position of the Middle Way school itself.


[3497]
DES NI RNAM PAR DAG PA’I LUGS NGAN RTOG GI BTZOG CHUS ‘BAD NAS SLOD PAR BYED PA YIN NO,,

But when they say this kind of thing, what they are actually doing is taking a very pure system of thought and exerting very conscious efforts to pollute it, with the most filthy water of their own mistaken ideas.


	[3498]
[VI.158]
Na tattvato naiva ca lokataś ca
sa saptadhā yadyapi yāti siddhim,
Svāṅgānyupādāya vinā vicāraṃ
prajñapyate lokata eva caiṣaḥ.

,DE NI DE NYID DU ‘AM ‘JIG RTEN DU,
,RNAM PA BDUN GYIS ‘GRUB ‘GYUR MIN MOD KYI,
,RNAM DPYAD MED PAR ‘JIG RTEN NYID LAS ‘DIR,
,RANG GI YAN LAG BRTEN NAS ‘DOGS PA YIN,

	Looking at that
In and of itself,
	Or even in the way
	That the world does,

	Admittedly this doesn’t
	End up something
	That could be established.
	
	But leaving off
	This close examination,
	Confining ourselves
	To the world,

	Here the labeling
	Has been done
	In reliance upon
	The component parts.


[3499]
KHO BO CAG LA NI SNGAR BSHAD PA’I RTZOD PA’I NYES PA DE MED DE, SHING RTA DE NI DE NYID DU STE DON DAM PA’AM, ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB TU BTAGS DON RNAM PA BDUN GYIS BTZAL BA NA SHING RTA ‘GRUB PAR ‘GYUR BA MIN MOD KYI,

Now the fact is that the problems raised in these previous arguments don’t apply to us ourselves at all.  That is, suppose we look—in those seven different ways—for that wagon that we have given the name in and of itself; which is to say, in an ultimate sense.  Or even, in the way that the world does, in a deceptive sense.  Admittedly this doesn’t end up something that could be established as a wagon.


[3500]
DE LTA NA’ANG SHING RTA ‘DI NI BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I RNAM PAR DPYAD PA MED PAR ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD NYID LAS, SNGON PO DANG TSOR BA LA SOGS PA LTAR ‘DIR NI RANG GI YAN LAG ‘PHANG LO SOGS LA BRTEN NAS ‘DOGS PA YIN PA

But now even though all that is the case, suppose that we leave off this close examination where we are seeking out what it is that we have used to label this thing a wagon.  Confining ourselves then to the verbiage of the world at large, here we can say that the labeling has been done in reliance upon the component parts of the wagon: the wheels, and so on.  And this is just the same as how we would applies labels such as “blue,” or “a feeling,” or anything else of the like.


[3501]
DE’I PHYIR SA MYUG SOGS LA, RTEN ‘BREL RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM KHAS BLANGS PA LTAR, SHING RTA YANG RANG GI YAN LAG LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PAR KHAS BLANGS PA’I PHYIR, KHO BO CAG GI PHYOGS LA SHING RTA ‘ON CIG CES PA SOGS KYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD MI RUNG BAR MI ‘GYUR LA,

As such, when we’re talking about things like seeds & sprouts, the view that we have accepted is this kind of dependent interconnection, this pure sort of causality.  Just so, what we say is that wagons as well are things that are labeled, in dependence upon their component parts.  Thus it is not the case that, according to our position, there is any possibility that the parlance of the world—“Bring that wagon” and so forth—could ever be somehow inappropriate.


[3502]
PHA ROL POS KYANG ‘DI KHAS BLANG BAR ‘OS PA YIN NO ZHES GSUNGS PAS SHING RTA’I BTAGS DON BTZAL [f. 238a] NAS MI ‘JOG PA DBU MA PA’I LUGS LA, ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KHAS LEN PA DANG, PHA ROL POS KYANG DE KHAS BLANG DGOS ZHES BSTAN PAR BYA’I,

And what we are saying is that it would be appropriate for the other side here to accept this way of thinking as well.  As such, when we run into those who say they are Middle Way and also say that when they go looking for what it is we’ve labeled the wagon we can never find it, what we try to clarify for them is that we feel we have to accept the verbiage of the everyday world; and that they should accept it as well.


[3503]
PHAR LA ‘PHANGS PA’I SKYON TSUR BZLOG PA’I TSE LAN MA THEBS PA NA KHAS BLANG MED CES SMRA BAR MI BYA’O,,

It is not though the case that when problems with their position that we have pointed out are implied in it are cast back upon us, you should simply sit there without offering any reply, declaring that “We are beyond taking any position.”



Another interpretation
of names

[3504]
BZHI PA NI,

And with this we arrive at our fourth point from above: a demonstration of how there is another interpretation of the meaning of terms used as names.


[3505]
DBU MA PA’I PHYOGS ‘DIR ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA’I SGO NAS SHING RTAS THA SNYAD ‘DOGS PA CHES GSAL BAR GRUB PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, SHING RTA’I MING GI KHYAD PAR GZHAN DAG KYANG BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I TSUL GYIS RNAM PAR DPYAD PA MED PAR ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA’I SGO NAS KHAS BLANG PAR BYA’O,,

Here in the standpoint of the Middle Way, it is exceedingly clear that this object has been labeled a “wagon” in keeping with the way that things are spoken of in the everyday world.  Not only that, but we can say that we accept other details of the naming of the wagon in just the way that these are commonly spoken of in the everyday world, without reference to any close examination utilizing a search for what it was that received the label.


	[3506]
[VI.159]
Aṅgī sa evāvayavī sa kartā
rathaḥ sa eveti jane niruktiḥ,
Siddho’pyupādātṛtayā janānāṃ
mā saṃvṛtiṃ nāśaya loka siddhām.

,DE NYID YAN LAG CAN DE CHA SHAS CAN,
,SHING RTA DE NYID BYED PO ZHES ‘GROR BSNYAD,
,SKYE BO RNAMS LA LEN PO NYID DU ‘GRUB,
,’JIG RTEN GRAGS PA’I KUN RDZOB MA BRLAG CIG,

		The thing itself
		Is a composite;
		This same thing
		Is a whole.

		This same wagon
		We can call
		“An agent.”

		Living beings
		Are designated
		In the same way.

		People are thus
		Established as
		Nothing other than
		The ones that do
		This incorporating.

		The deceptive
		In the common parlance
		Of the world would be
		“Don’t ruin that.”


[3507]
DE LA SHING RTA DE NYID NI ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA RANG GI YAN LAG LA LTOS NAS YAN LAG CAN DANG, YANG DE ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA’I CHA SHAS LA LTOS NAS NI CHA SHAS CAN DANG,

Here the wagon—the thing itself—is a composite which relies upon its component pieces of the wheels and the rest.  We could also say that this same thing is a whole which relies upon the parts of the wheels and the rest.


[3508]
SHING RTA DE NYID ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA NYE BAR BLANG BAR BYA BA NYE BAR LEN PA’I BYA BA LA LTOS NAS NI, BYED PA PO ZHES ‘GRO BA LA BSNYAD PA DANG, RANG GI NYE BAR LEN PA GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I GDAGS GZHI LA LTOS NAS NI, SKYE BO RNAMS LA LEN PA PO NYID DU YANG ‘GRUB BO,,

We can also say that this same wagon is an incorporation of the the wheels and the rest.  And then since it relies upon what it has incorporated, we can call it an “agent.”  Living beings are designated in the same way; that is, dependent upon what it is they incorporate—their form and the rest—we can also say that people are thus established as nothing other than the ones that do this kind of taking on or incorporating.


[3509]
GANG ‘GA’ ZHIG GSUNG RAB KYI DON PHYIN CI LOG TU RTOGS PAS YAN LAG TSOGS PA TZAM ZHIG YOD KYI, TSOGS PA TZAM DE MIN PA’I YAN LAG CAN NI RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MED DE, TSOGS PA DE LAS NGO BO THA DAD PAR MA DMIGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now there are some who understand the meaning of the scriptures in a completely mistaken way, and thus would say that there does exist the simple collection; but that there is in no manner at all of some whole of the component parts which is not the simple collection.  And this, they would say, is because there does not exist any such a whole which can be observed which is essentially separate from the collection.


[3510]
DE BZHIN DU SBYAR TE CHA SHAS DANG LAS DANG NYE BAR LEN PA TSOGS PA TZAM ZHIG YOD KYI, DE MIN PA’I CHA SHAS CAN DANG BYED PA PO DANG, NYE BAR LEN PA PO NI RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MED DE, DE RNAMS LAS [f. 238b] NGO BO THA DAD PAR MA DMIGS PA’I PHYIR,

Continuing on in the same vein, they would say that there do exist the pieces; and the action; and the incorporating and the simple collection; but they would say that there is in no wise a whole of the pieces which is not them; or such an agent, or one who does the incorporating.  This is due to the fact that none of these could ever be observed in a way which was essentially different from those things.


[3511]
ZHES DE LTA BUR RNAM PAR GNAS PA’I ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB PHYIN CI LOG TU SMRA BA DE’I LTAR NA, BSHAD MA THAG PA’I YAN LAG CAN MED PA’I GTAN TSIGS DE NYID KYIS, YAN LAG LA SOGS PA TZAM YANG MED PAR ‘GYUR BAS ‘JIG RTEN NA GRAGS PA’I KUN RDZOB SHING RTA LA SOGS PA MA BRLAG PA STE ‘JIG PAR MA BYED CIG CES ‘DI NI BZLOG PAR BYA BA KHO NA’O,,

Thus it is that that they describe, mistakenly, a deceptive nature of the world which exists in this way.  According to the logical statement just described—where it is said that no whole of the composite parts exists—even just those parts and so on could no longer exist.  And then the expression about the deceptive in the common parlance of the world—where someone says “don’t ruin that wagon” or the like, asking that we refrain from destroying it—would only be something that was refused.


[3512]
‘DIR RANG GI SDE PA GONG ‘OG GZHAN RNAMS YAN LAG TSOGS PA LA SOGS PA YAN LAG CAN LA SOGS PAR ‘DOD PA NI, DE RNAMS YAN LAG CAN LA SOGS PAR MA BZHAG NA DE RNAMS LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I YAN LAG CAN LA SOGS PA YANG MED PAR MTHONG NAS BYA BA BYED NUS KYI YAN LAG CAN LA SOGS PA ‘JOG MA SHES PAS

Now others of the higher & lower schools of our own group take the position that the collection of the component parts and the like are the whole of the parts and such.  If they do not posit thus the whole of the parts and so on, then they see that there is no such whole of the parts or the like that could exist as essentially different from these.  Thus then they cannot understand how to establish a whole of the component parts, or anything of the like, that would have the capacity to perform the relevant functions.


[3513]
DE LTAR ‘DOD DE, DE DAG GIS YAN LAG CAN LA SOGS PA’I BTAGS DON BTZAL NAS MA RNYED NA, DE RNAMS ‘JOG MI SHES PA YIN NO,,

And thus then too do they take their position.  If these thinkers go looking for what was given the label in things like the whole of the component parts and don’t find anything, then they don’t see how these things could be established what they are.
 

[3514]
DE’I PHYIR SHING RTA SOGS MING DU BTAGS PA TZAM DU MI ‘DOD PAS SHING RTA LA SOGS PA RNAMS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DOD PA YIN PAS,

As such—given that they cannot accept that things like a wagon and so forth are simply labeled what they are—they have to take the position that wagons and the like exist by definition.


[3515]
DE LA GSUNG RAB KYI DON PHYIN CI LOG TU RTOGS PA ZHES ‘GREL PAR GSUNGS TE, LUGS DAM PA ‘DIS NI YAN LAG TSOGS TZAM DANG, DE’I YA GYAL SOGS GANG YANG YAN LAG CAN LA SOGS PA’I MTSAN GZHIR MA BZUNG YANG, YAN LAG CAN LA SOGS PA MING DU BTAGS PA TZAM LA BYA BYED LEGS PAR ‘JOG NUS PA

And then what the autocommentary says is that these kinds of people have completely misunderstood the meaning of the scriptures.  That is, in this highest system suppose even that we refuse to consider the simple collection of the component parts, or any form of its separate constituents or the like, as the typical example of the whole of the component parts, and such.  But at the same time we interpret the meaning of scripture as saying that—even in a case where we do nothing more than apply a name to the whole of the component parts or the like—we are still perfectly able to establish with ease the entire manner in which things work in the world.


[3516]
GSUNG RAB KYI DON DU ‘GREL PA, THUB PA’I DGONGS PA THUN MONG MA YIN PA YIN PAS, RNAM DPYOD CAN GYIS DGONGS PA ‘GREL LUGS ‘DI LA SBYANG BAR BYA’O,,

Taking this as the meaning of scripture represents the perfectly unique intent of the Able Ones; as such, those of you possessed of discernment should verse yourselves in this manner of explaining their true thought.



The actual point about
eliminating extremes

[3517]
DRUG PA LA LNGA, DNGOS [f. 239a] KYI DON, DE LA RTZOD PA SPONG BA, SHING RTA DANG BDAG GI THA SNYAD RNAMS DPE DON DU SBYAR BA, BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG KHAS LEN PA’I YON TAN GZHAN BSTAN PA, MKHAS RMONGS KYI ‘CHING GROL GYI GZHI’I BDAG NGOS GZUNG BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us then to our sixth point from above, which is a demonstration of how setting things forth in this manner has the advantage of making it easy to eliminate the notion where we hold to things in some extreme way.  We cover this topic in five different sections: (1) the actual point being made; (2) refuting argument on the point; (3) explaining the terms of a wagon and the self with reference to a metaphor and its referent; (4) demonstrating further advantages to accepting the position of a self which is labeled in dependence; and (5) an identification of the self, which is the foundation for the bondage & liberation of the ignorant & masters.


[3518]
GANG GI PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN GYI KUN RDZOB ‘DI SNGAR BSHAD PA DE LTAR BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I TSUL GYIS RNAM PA BDUN DU DPYAD PA NA,

Let’s examine this question of explaining, as we mentioned before, the deceptive reality of the everyday world in terms of seeking what it is we have given a label, in an examination of seven different steps.


[3519]
YOD PA RNYED PAR MI ‘GYUR ZHING, MA BRTAGS PA GRAGS PAS YOD PA DE NYID KYI PHYIR, RNAL ‘BYOR PAS SNGAR BSHAD PA’I RIM PA ‘DI NYID KYIS BDAG DANG SHING RTA ‘DI LA SNGAR LTAR RNAM PAR DPYOD PA NA, CHES MYUR BA KHO NAR DE KHO NA NYID KYI GTING DPOGS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

In this case we will not find anything existing there; but the fact remains that it exists by convention, in an unexamined manner.  And suppose that a deep practitioner uses these very same steps that we have explained earlier, to undertake a thorough examination (also as we described it before) of this self, and this wagon.  It is only with extreme speed then that they will manage to plumb the depths of suchness.


[3520]
DE JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA, SHING RTA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ZHIG YIN NA RNAM PA BDUN GYIS BTZAL BA NA NGES PAR BDUN PO GANG RUNG ZHIG TU RNYED DGOS PA LA, RNAL ‘BYOR PAS SHING RTA ‘DI’I YOD PA NYID MI RNYED DO,,

“Just what does that look like?” you may inquire.  Suppose that a wagon were something that existed through some nature of its own.  In that case, if we did our search in those seven different aspects, we would without doubt have to locate the wagon in some one of the seven options.  The fact is though is that the deep practitioner does not arrive at any pure existence of this wagon.


	[3521]
[VI.160]
Yaḥ saptadhā nāsti kathaṃ tu sa syād
ityasya sattāṃ labhate na yogi,
Tattvāvatāro’pi sukhena vāta
itīṣyatām evam ihāsya siddhiḥ.

,RNAM BDUN GYIS MED GANG DE JI LTA BUR,
,YOD CES RNAL ‘BYOR PAS ‘DI’I YOD MI RNYED,
,DES DE NYID LA’ANG BDE BLAG ‘JUG ‘GYUR BAS,
,’DIR DE’I GRUB PA DE BZHIN ‘DOD PAR BYA,

		Not finding anything
		Using seven different
		Options means that
	
		The way things
		Really are is something
		Which is devoid
		Of existing.

		In this, the
Deep practitioner
Also engages with ease
In suchness.

As such,
Here we are
Also to accept
This, in the
Same manner.


[3522]
DE’I TSE RNAM PA BDUN GYIS BTZAL BA NA MI RNYED PA GANG DE JI LTA BUR NA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD CES TE MED DO,,

This not finding anything when we do our search using the seven different options means that the way things really are is something which is devoid of existing through any nature of its own.


[3523]
DE’I PHYIR SHING RTA NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA ZHES BYA BA NI, MA RIG PA’I LING TOG GIS BLO’I MIG NYAMS PAR BYAS PA KHO NAS BRTAGS PA YIN GYI,

As such, we can say that the very expression that “a wagon is something which exists through some essential nature of its own” is only something imputed by an individual who has seen the eyes of their intellect degraded by the cataract of misunderstanding.


[3524]
RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NI YOD PA MA YIN NO SNYAM PA DE LTAR RNAL ‘BYOR PA LA NGES PA SKYE BAR ‘GYUR ZHING, TSUL DES DE KHO NA NYID LA YANG RNAL ‘BYOR PA BDE BLAG TU ‘JUG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

The deep pracititioner though is someone who gives birth to a certain certainty, as they think to themselves that there is no such thing as something existing through some nature of its own.  And in this manner, as well, the deep practitioner engages with ease in suchness.


[3525]
‘ANG GI SGRAS NI KUN RDZOB KYI RNAM GZHAG NYAMS PAR YANG MI ‘GYUR BA BSDU’O,,

The phrase “as well” in the root text here is meant to embrace the additional point that neither is it the case that in this case the practitioner will lose a correct understanding of deceptive reality.


[3526]
DE BAS NA DBU MA PA’I SKABS ‘DIR SHING RTA DE’I GRUB PA’I TSUL NI MA BRTAGS PAR [f. 239b] GRUB PA DE BZHIN DU ‘DOD PAR BYA’O,,

As such, then, here in the context of a follower of the Middle Way, we are also to accept—in the same manner—a way in which this wagon can exist without being examined.


[3527]
DBU MA PA’I LUGS LA MKHAS PA DAG GIS SNGAR BSHAD PA’I PHYOGS ‘DI NI SKYON MED CING PHAN YON DANG BCAS PA’O SNYAM DU BSAMS TE NGES PAR KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’O ZHES GSUNGS PAS,

Those who are masters of the system of the Middle Way then should think to themselves, as we see it said here, “The position that has previously been explained here is without fault; and possesses as well great benefit—it is quite certainly something that should be accepted.”


[3528]
‘DI’I LUGS SKYON MED PA RANG GI LUGS LA KHAS BLANG BAR BYA’I, ‘DI LA LUGS YOD PA MIN NO ZHES GNOD BKUR BAR MI BYA’O,,

The faultless system expressed here then is something that we should accept as being our own position.  One should never though do damage to this same approach by denigrating it with the statement that “Here in this system, we have no system at all.”



Refuting argument
on eliminating extremes

[3529]
GNYIS PA NI,

And so now we have reached our second section from above: refuting argument on the point of eliminating the extremes.


[3530]
‘DIR SMRAS PA, RNAL ‘BYOR PAS SNGAR LTAR DPYAD PA NA SHING RTA MA DMIGS PA LA RAG MOD, DE’I YAN LAG TSOGS PA TZAM ZHIG DMIGS PA NI RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD DO ZHE NA,

Here then someone comes with the following statement:

Your position here is one given with reference to a deep practitioner who has made an examination as described earlier, and failed to perceive then a wagon; they do though observe a collection of the component parts to this thing, and that does exist through some nature of its own.


	[3531]
[VI.161]
Sattvaṃ rathasyāsti na cet tadānīṃ
vināṅgināṅgānyapi santi nāsya,
Dagdhe rathe’ṅgāni yathā na santi
dhī vahni dagdhe’ṅgini tadvad aṅgam.

,SHING RTA YOD NYID MIN NA DE YI TSE,
,YAN LAG CAN MED DE’I YAN LAG KYANG MED,
,SHING RTA TSIG NA YAN LAG MED DPE BZHIN,
,BLO MES YAN LAG CAN BSREGS YAN LAG GO ,

		If it’s the case
		That a wagon
		Cannot exist
		In itself, then

		At that point
		The whole of the
		Component parts
		Cannot exist;

		Those component
		Parts too cannot exist.

		Suppose the wagon
		Is burned up;
		The component parts
		Are gone—

		We follow now
		This metaphor.

		The fire of the mind
		Burns up the whole
		Of the component parts;

		And those
		Component parts.


[3532]
SNAM BU TSIG PA’I THAL BA LA SNAL MA TSOL BA KHYOD NI BZHAD GAD DU BYA BA ZHIG STE, SHING RTA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA NYID MIN NA, DE’I TSE YAN LAG CAN NGO BO NYID KYIS MED PAS, DE’I YAN LAG DAG KYANG NGO BO NYID KYIS MED DO,,

Your attempt here to find a surviving thread within the ashes of a burnt bolt of cloth is a real joke.  If it’s the case that a wagon cannot exist in itself—through some nature of its own—then at that point the whole of the component parts cannot exist through some essence of its own.  Thus then it’s the case that those component parts too cannot be things that exist through some essence of their own.


[3533]
GAL TE SHING RTA SO SOR ZHIG PA NA DE’I ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA TSOGS PA DMIGS PA NYID MA YIN NAM, DE’I PHYIR YAN LAG CAN MED PAR YAN LAG DAG KYANG MED DO ZHES CI STE BRJOD CE NA,

One may come then with the following question—

Suppose you take a wagon and break it apart.  Isn’t it the case then that the collection of the parts—the wheels and so forth—is still something you can observe?  Why then do you say if the whole of the parts is gone, the parts too must be gone?


[3534]
DE NI DE LTAR MA YIN TE SO SOR GYES PA’I YAN LAG SHING RTA’I YAN LAG TU ‘DZIN PA NI, SNGAR DE RNAMS SHING RTA DANG ‘BREL BAR RIG PA KHO NAS, ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA ‘DI DAG NI SHING RTA’I YAN LAG YIN NO SNYAM DU RTOGS KYI,

But that isn’t exactly the way things are.  When you grasp to the disassembled, separate parts as being the parts to a wagon, it is something that only happens because you know that previously they were connected to the wagon.  That’s the only way that you can come to this conclusion, thinking to yourself, “Oh, these things—the wheels and the rest—are parts of a wagon.”


[3535]
SNGAR DE LTAR MI SHES PA GZHAN GYIS NI MA YIN TE, GANG ZAG DE NI ‘PHANG LO SOGS KYI RANG GI CHA SHAS LA LTOS NAS, ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA KHO NA YAN LAG CAN NYID DU RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

This though is not something that someone else can do, who didn’t know that fact earlier.  That is, this other kind of person is depending upon the parts to the wheels and so on, and understanding no more than the wheels and the rest as wholes of parts.


[3536]
GANG ZAG DE’I NGOR ‘PHANG LO LA SOGS PA SHING RTA DANG ‘BREL BA YANG RGYANG RING DU SPANGS PA KHO NA YIN PAS, DE’I TSE DE DAG NI SHING RTA’I YAN LAG TU [f. 240a] MI RTOGS SO,,

In the perceptions of this person, the wheels and the rest may be related to a wagon; but this concept can only be quite removed, and far off.  As such, they do not at that moment understand these things as the component parts of a wagon.


[3537]
GZHAN YANG SHING RTA RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB NA DE’I YAN LAG KYANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN PA’I DON ‘DI NI, DPE ‘DI LAS SHES PAR BYA STE,

Moreover, the point that if a wagon is not something that could exist through some nature of its own, then its component parts cannot either be things that exist through some nature of their own is something that we can understand from this metaphor.


[3538]
DPER NA SHING RTA YAN LAG CAN MES TSIG NA YAN LAG RNAMS KYANG MED PA STE MES ‘TSIG PAR ‘GYUR BA’I DPE DE BZHIN DU,

Suppose for example that the whole of the component parts—the wagon—is burned up in a fire.  Then the component parts themselves are also gone—they are consumed by the fire.  We follow now this metaphor.


[3539]
RNAM PAR DPYOD PA’I GTZUB SHING GTZUBS PA LAS BYUNG BA’I MI DMIGS PA RTOGS PA’I BLO SHES RAB KYI MES,

And so consider then the fire of the mind, the wisdom, with which we grasp the way in which things are not even there: consider this fire, which springs from the heat of the friction of the fire sticks of true analysis.


[3540]
YAN LAG CAN SHING RTA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA LUS PA MED PAR BSREGS PA NA, SHES RAB KYI ME’I BUD SHING DU GYUR PA’I YAN LAG DAG GIS KYANG BDAG NYID ZUG TSUGS PAR TE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR SDAD PAR BYED MI NUS TE, SHES RAB KYI MES NGES PAR BSREGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This fire burns up, without a single thing left over, that idea that the whole of the component parts—the wagon—could exist through any nature of its own.  And those types of component parts themselves—which provide the firewood for the fire of wisdom—cannot stand on their own; that is, nothing can make them capable of staying there through some nature of their own.  Which is to say, they are with certainty burned up completely in these flames of wisdom.



The wagon & the self

[3541]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third section from above: explaining the terms of a wagon and the self with reference to a metaphor and its referent.


	[3542]
[VI.162]
Ātmāpyupādātṛtayā tatheṣṭaḥ
skandhān upādāya jagat pratītyā,
Dhātūṃs tathā cāyatanāni ṣaḍḍhā
karmāpyupādānam asau ca kartā.

,DE BZHIN ‘JIG RTEN GRAGS PAS PHUNG PO DANG,
,KHAMS DANG DE BZHIN SKYE MCHED DRUG BRTEN NAS,
,BDAG KYANG NYE BAR LEN PA NYID DU ‘DOD,
,NYER LEN LAS YIN ‘DI NI BYED PO’ANG YIN,

	We are asserting
	That similarly,
	In the convention of
	The everyday world,
	
	The self as well
	Depends upon the
	Parts to the person;
	The realms; and
	Just so the six
	Doors of sense—

	And thus
Becomes a perfect
	Incorporator of them.
	
	What is incorporated
	Is the act, while this
	Is the agent.


[3543]
JI LTAR KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA MI GCAD PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DANG, RNAL ‘BYOR PA RNAMS DE KHO NA NYID LA BDE BLAG TU ‘JUG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, SHING RTA RNAM PAR DPYAD PA’I TSUL LA BSAMS TE BRTEN NAS GDAGS PA RNAM PAR BZHAG PA

Think then of how we are taking care not to exclude the concept of deceptive reality, and how easily here deep practitioners can engage with perfect ease in the concept of suchness.  That is, by giving thought to this manner of examining a wagon, we are able to establish how things are labeled in dependence.


[3544]
DE BZHIN DU, ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA’I SGO NAS NYE BAR LEN PA PHUNG PO LNGA DANG, KHAMS DRUG DANG, DE BZHIN DU SKYE MCHED DRUG LA BRTEN NAS BDAG KYANG SHING RTA LTAR NYE BAR LEN PA PO NYID DU ‘DOD DE, DE DAG LA BRTEN NAS BDAG TU BTAGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And what we assert is similar to this.  We are following the convention of the everyday world, with regard to the five parts to the person; the six outer realms; and just so the six doors of sense.  We are asserting that the self as well depends upon these things—like a wagon—and thus becomes a perfect incorporator of them.  Which is to say, we label something the “self” dependent upon these things.


[3545]
DE BZHIN DU NYE BAR LEN PA PHUNG PO NI LAS YIN LA, BDAG ‘DI NI BYED PA PO’ANG YIN NO ZHES RNAM PAR BZHAG GO

In the same way, we can also describe what is incorporated—the parts to the person—as being in a sense the act, while this self is the agent.



Further advantages
to a dependent self

[3546]
,BZHI PA NI,

Which brings us to our fourth point from before: demonstrating further advantages to accepting the position of a self which is labeled in dependence.


	[3547]
[VI.163]
Nānityatā cāsya na nityatā ca
na jāyate naśyati naiva cāyam,
Na śāsvatatvādi ca vidyate’sya
tattvaṃ na cānyatvam avastu sattvāt.

,DNGOS YOD MIN PHYIR ‘DI NI BRTAN MIN ZHING,
,MI BRTAN NYID MIN ‘DI NI SKYE ‘JIG MIN,
,’DI LA RTAG PA NYID LA SOGS PA YANG,
,YOD MIN DE NYID DANG NI GZHAN NYID MIN,

	Because that entity
	Is not something
	That exists,

	This could not be
	Something perfectly
	Solid, or not solid;

	This neither
	Starts nor stops;

	Nor could this exist as
	Perfectly unchanging,
	Or so forth—

	It does not exist
	As that itself,
	Or something
	Essentially different.


[3548]
BDAG BRTEN NAS GDAGS PA LA ‘JOG PA NA, BRTAN PA DANG MI BRTAN PA LA SOGS PA’I MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PA’I RTEN MIN PAS MI RTAG PA LA SOGS [f. 240b] PAR NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DZIN PA’I RTOG PA BZLOG PAR SLA BAR ‘GYUR RO ZHES BSHAD PA,

Our next section here is presented in order to make the following point.  Suppose we can establish that the self is something which is labeled in dependence.  In this case, it would no longer serve as a foundation for the kind of thinking where we hold to the extremes of believing that things are either solid, or not solid.  It then becomes relatively easy to stop the idea where we hold that things like impermanence could exist through some essence of their own.


[3549]
PHUNG PO DAG LA BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG ‘DI NI BRTAN PA DANG MI BRTAN PA NYID DU RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN NO,,

And so we can say that this kind of self which was labeled on the basis of the parts to the person could not be something that existed through some nature of its own—as being perfectly solid, or not solid.


[3550]
GAL TE BDAG MI BRTAN PAR NGO BO NYID KYIS YOD NA NI, BDAG DANG NYE BAR LEN PA GNYIS NGO BO THA DAD PA MI RUNG BAS NYE BAR LEN PA NYID BDAG TU ‘GYUR LA,

Now if the self existed in & of itself in a way which was not solid, it would be inappropriate to say that these two—the self and what it incorporated—were essentially separate from each other.  And in that case then, what was incorporated would itself become the self.


[3551]
DE LTA NA BDAG SKAD CIG SO SO LA NGO BO NYID KYIS SKYE ‘JIG SO SOR BYED PAS SNGA PHYI ‘BREL MED DU ‘GYUR BA DANG, NYE BAR BLANG BAR BYA BA RNAMS DE’I NYE BAR LEN PA POR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR MI RIGS SO,,

And in that case then the self would act to arise and to stop, individually, through some essence of its own, in every individual moment in time.  And this means then that what comes earlier and what comes later would share no connection; and all the items that were incorporated would become what incorporated them—which doesn’t make any sense at all.


[3552]
DE BZHIN DU BRTAN PA STE RTAG PAR YANG MI ‘THAD DE, DE RTAG NA SNGON GYI TSE RABS SU BYUNG BA’I DUS KYI BDAG DE NYID ‘DIR BYUNG BA’I BDAG YIN PA DANG, TSE SNGA MA DANG ‘DI’I BDAG GNYIS KYI NYE BAR LEN PA’I PHUNG PO NGO BO THA DAD PA YIN PAS, BDAG GCIG TU MI RUNG STE NYE BAR LEN PA LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BDAG MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It would by the same token also be incorrect to say that this self were solid—which is to say, unchanging.  If it were unchanging, then the very same self that had occurred at the point of the earlier string of lifetimes would be the self that had occurred here.  And since the parts to the person taken on for the two selves—that of the previous life, and that of this one—would be essentially separate, then it would be wrong to say that they were essentially one & the same.  That is, there could be no self that was essentially separate from what it incorporated.


[3553]
RTZA SHER, GAL TE PHUNG PO BDAG YIN NA, ,SKYE DANG ‘JIG PA CAN DU ‘GYUR, ZHES GSUNGS PA

Now Wisdom has those lines that say,

If the self
	Were the parts
	To the person,

	Then it would be
	Something that
Went through starting
And stopping too.


[3554]
‘DI LAS NA ‘DI NI SKYE ‘JIG MIN ZHES PA’I KHYAD PAR GNYIS BKOD PA SLOB DPON GYI BZHED PA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS TE, SKYE ‘JIG NI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’O,,

Here we see “it is the Master’s position that we mention both characteristics, that ‘this neither starts nor stops.’”  This is referring to a starting & stopping that would exist through some essence of its own. 


[3555]
BDAG ‘DI LA RTAG PA NYID LA SOGS PA’I BZHI TSAN YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN TE, RTZA SHE LAS DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA BRTAG PA’I THABS KYIS YONGS SU RTOG PAR MDZAD PA NA, RTAG DANG MI RTAG LA SOGS BZHI, ,ZHI BA ‘DI LA GA LA YOD, CES BYA BA LA SOGS PA LTA BU’O,,

Nor could this self be something that displayed any of the set of four different possibilities—being perfectly unchanging, or so forth—where these existed through some nature of their own.  This is similar to where Wisdom examines the question by means of examining the Ones Gone Thus; and expresses it with lines such as:
	
How could you ever say
	That this state of peace

	Involved any of the four
	Of being unchanging,
	Or changing, or the rest?


[3556]
BDAG ‘DI NI DE NYID DE NGO BO GCIG PA DANG [f. 241a] GZHAN NYID DU RANG BZHIN GYIS MED DO,,

That is, this self does not exist as that itself—meaning, the one thing, essentially one, or something essentially different; at least through any nature of its own.


[3557]
DE RNAMS KYI RGYU MTSAN NI BDAG CES BYA BA’I DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YOD PA MIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And that’s all because—the reason for saying these things is—that entity which we refer to as the “self” is not something that exists through any nature of its own.


[3558]
JI SKAD DU MDO LAS,
,MI ZAD PA YI CHOS BZHI NI,
,’JIG RTEN MGON GYIS BSTAN PA STE,
,SEMS CAN NAM MKHA’ BYANG CHUB SEMS,
,DE BZHIN SANGS RGYAS CHOS RNAMS SO,,

Sutra puts it this way:

	The Savior of the World
	Taught that four different things
	Would never wear out:

	Living beings;
	The sky; the Wish
	For enlightenment;
	And the teachings
	Of the Buddhas.
 	

	[3559]
,GAL TE DE DAG RDZAS YOD NA,
,DE DAG YONGS SU ZAD ‘GYUR GRANG,
,MED PA DE DAG MI ZAD DE,
,DE PHYIR DE DAG ZAD MED GSUNGS,
ZHES SO,,

	If these things
	Existed substantially,

	Then we would have to
	Consider them things
	That could wear out.

	But things that cannot
	Exist cannot wear out;

	Thus it is it was spoken
	That this they could never do.
	

[3560]
SEMS CAN RDZAS SU MED PAS MI ZAD PAR GSUNGS PA NI ‘DIR KHUNGS SO,,

This by the way is the source for statements that living beings can never wear out, because they do not exist substantially.



Self: foundation
for bondage & liberation

[3561]
LNGA PA NI,

And now we have reached our fifth and final point from above: an identification of the self, which is the foundation for the bondage & liberation of the ignorant & masters.


[3562]
GANG ZHIG BTAGS DON RNAM PA BDUN GYIS BTZAL BA NA, RTAG PA DANG MI RTAG PA NYID DU MI SRID CING, BDAG GANG ZHIG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA NYID MA MTHONG ZHING,

Now there are those who fail to seek—in those seven different ways—what it is that receives the label; and thus cannot come to see that it is simply not possible for it to be unchanging or changing—and cannot recognize that there is absolutely no self anywhere that could exist through some nature of its own.


[3563]
MA RIG PA’I DBANG GIS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA NYID DU ZHEN NAS, ‘JIG LTAS BDAG ‘DI NI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA RNAMS ‘KHOR BAR ‘GYUR LA,

Due to misunderstanding then they are strongly attracted to the idea that things must exist through some nature of their own.  And due to this, they hold strongly—through that view of destruction—to the idea that this self could exist through some nature of its own.  And because of this, they must make their circle.


[3564]
BDAG GANG ZHIG YONGS SU TSOL BA NA, MU STEGS PA BDAG ‘TSOL BA DE’I RIGS PAS PHUNG PO NYID BDAG TU MI ‘THAD PAR MTHONG BAS, BDAG DE’I RANG GI NGO BO LA PHYIN CI LOG TU GYUR PA THAMS CAD PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PAR ZHEN CING,

When people undertake some exhaustive examination to find the self, they see that the logic which is used by the River Schools in their search for the self is insufficient for proving that the parts to the person themselves could be the self.  As such, all of those here who are completely mistaken about the essential nature of that self feel a strong attraction to the idea that the self must be something essentially separate from these parts to the person.


[3565]
RANG GI SDE PA RNAMS KYIS KYANG PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I BDAG MED DO SNYAM ZHING ‘KHRUL BAS, PHUNG PO TZAM NYID BDAG TU KHAS BLANGS TE, DE GNYIS GANG RUNG ZHIG TU KHAS BLANG DGOS SNYAM DU BSAMS PA’O,,

There are those in our own group as well who think to themselves that there must be no self that is essentially separate from the parts to the person.  In their mistake then they agree to the idea that the it is the simple parts to the person which constitute the self.  That is, their thinking here is that—the way they see it—they would have to accept one or another of the two options.


	[3566]
[VI.164]
Ayaṃ sa ātmā jagatāṃ pravṛttā
yasmin ahaṃkāra matiḥ sadaiva,
Yat tasya tasmin mamakāra buddhir
udeti mohād avicāra buddhyā.

,GANG PHYIR RTAG TU ‘GRO RNAMS NGAR ‘DZIN BLO,
,RAB TU ‘BYUNG ZHING DE YI GANG YIN DER,
,NGA YIR ‘DZIN BLO ‘BYUNG BA’I BDAG DE NI,
,MA BRTAGS GRAGS PAR GTI MUG LAS YIN NO,

		It is indeed the case
		That a state of mind
		Is forever arising with

		All those living beings
		Which holds to “me.”

		Everything there
		Is that which is of it:

		Everything that makes up
		That self towards which
		There arises the state
		Of mind that
Holds to “me.”

It is something
That stems from
That dark state
Of ignorance

Towards one
Which is unexamined,
In the parlance
Of the world.		


[3567]
GSUNG RAB KYI DON PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR ‘CHAD PA RNAMS NI,

Here though is what would be said by those who are capable of explaining the meaning of scripture in a completely unmistaken way.


[3568]
SNGA MA DE GNYIS GANG DU YANG YOD PA MA YIN NO SNYAM DU RIG NAS LAN BRGYAR [f. 241b] GROL BAR ‘GYUR BA DE NI BDAG YIN ZHING,

First of all, they would understand; they would have the thought that neither of those two options presented earlier was the way things are.  They would repeat—a thousand times—that it is the self which achieves liberation.


[3569]
‘GRO BA MI DANG YI DVAGS DANG DUD ‘GRO LA SOGS PAR GNAS PA MTHA’ DAG RNAMS LA, RTAG TU DMIGS PA’I GZHI GANG ZHIG LA DMIGS NAS NGAR ‘DZIN PA’I BLO RAB TU ‘BYUNG ZHING,

And they would say that this self is the foundation that all those living beings—they who live among the humans, the craving spirits, the animals, and every other form of life—are forever looking upon; and that towards which, when they look upon it, a state of mind is forever arising which holds that to be “me.”


[3570]
GANG DU BDAG ‘DI DBANG BYED PA NYID DAM, BDAG DE DANG ‘BREL BA ‘GA’ ZHIG TU ‘GYUR BA BDAG ‘DI GDAGS PA’I RTEN MIG LA SOGS PA NANG GI BDAG NYID CAN DANG, PHYI ROL GANG YIN PA

And then also let us consider what pertains to this self; that number of things which are related to the self.  That is, let’s consider that basis which is labeled this “self”: those entitites which are inner (the eye and so on); and those which are outer.


[3571]
BDAG DE YI BDAG GI BA GANG YIN PA DER, NGA YI BAR ‘DZIN PA’I BLO ‘BYUNG BA’I BDAG DE NI, MA BRTAGS PA’I GRAGS PA’I NGOR GTI MUG STE MI SHES PA LAS GRUB PA YIN GYI RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA NI MA YIN NO,,

In short then, let us consider everything there is which is of it, the self: which belongs to the self.  This is everything that makes up that self towards which there arises the state of mind that holds to “me.”  And it is something that stems from misunderstanding: from that dark state of ignorance focused towards a self that is unexamined, and accepted on face value, in the parlance of the world.  It is not though something that could exist through some essence of its own.


[3572]
GANG GI PHYIR BDAG ‘DI RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN MOD KYI, ‘ON KYANG GTI MUG STE MI SHES PA LAS YOD PAR THA SNYAD ‘DOGS PA’I PHYIR, RNAL ‘BYOR PAS DE ‘DRA BA’I BDAG RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MA DMIGS LA,

“It is indeed the case”; that is, it is admittedly true that this self is not something that could exist through some nature of its own.  The appellation “it exists” though is applied to it, through our ignorance: our failure to understand.  As such, no deep practitioner could ever perceive this type of self, in any way at all.


[3573]
DE MA DMIGS NA’ANG MIG LA SOGS PA BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DE’I NYE BAR LEN PA RNAMS DMIGS PAR MI ‘GYUR TE, ‘DI LTAR RNAL ‘BYOR PAS NI BDAG DANG BDAG GI BA’I GZHI’I DNGOS PO ‘GA’ LA YANG RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA DMIGS PA MED DE, DE’I PHYIR ‘KHOR BA LAS GROL BAR ‘GYUR TE,

And even though they never perceive such a thing, neither do they perceive anything it is that this self-existent self could incorporate.  Thus it is that there is nothing at all that the deep practitioner perceives as existing through some essence of its own, when we are talking about that base entity for the self, and what belongs to the self.  And because of that not seeing, this practitioner comes to be free of the cycle of pain.


[3574]
RTZA SHE LAS,
,NANG DANG PHYI ROL NYID DAG LA,
,BDAG DANG BDAG GI SNYAM ZAD NA,
,NYE BAR LEN PA ‘GAG ‘GYUR ZHING,
,DE ZAD PAS NA SKYE BA ZAD,
CES GSUNGS SO,,

As Wisdom puts it,

	The idea of self
	And something belonging
	To the self
	Is finished,

	Towards both
	What could be inside,
	And what could be out.

	Taking them on then
	Is blocked;

	And when that is done,
	We are done
	With being born.



Denying any nature
to what belongs to the self

[3575]
GNYIS PA NI,

With this we have reached our second point from above: denying that what belongs to the self could exist through any nature of its own.


	[3576]
[VI.165]
Akartṛkaṃ karma ca nāsti yasmād
ātmānam ātmīyam ato vinā’sat,
Ātmānam ātmīyam ataḥ sa śūnyaṃ
paśyan vimuktiṃ samupaiti yogi.

,GANG PHYIR BYED PO MED CAN LAS MED PA,
,DE PHYIR BDAG GI BDAG MED PAR YOD MIN,
,DE PHYIR BDAG DANG BDAG GI STONG LTA ZHING,
,RNAL ‘BYOR PA DE RNAM PAR GROL BAR ‘GYUR,

		An agent
		Has no existence,
		
		And what they
		Act towards
		Has no existence
		Either.

		As such,
		Something belonging
		To the self

		Is not something
		That could ever exist
		With a self
		That could not
		Itself exist.

		As such,
		That deep practitioner
		Who sees that
		Both the self
		
		And what belongs
		To the self 
		Are empty
		Is completely liberated.


[3577]
YANG JI LTAR BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS MED NA BDAG GI BA YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS MED CE NA,

One might begin with the following question:

Given that the self cannot exist through any nature of its own, is it also true that what belongs to the self cannot exist through any such nature?


[3578]
JI LTAR BYED PA PO RDZA MKHAN MED PA CAN GYI LAS SU BYA BA RDZA BUM MED PA DE’I [f. 242a] PHYIR BDAG GI BA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NI, BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR YOD PA MIN NO,,

It’s just the way in which an agent—say, the potter—is something that has no existence; and what they act towards—the clay pot itself—has no existence either.  As such, let’s consider something belonging to the self that could exist through some nature of its own.  This is not something that could ever exist, with a self that could not itself exist through any nature of its own.


[3579]
DE’I PHYIR BDAG DANG BDAG GI BA GNYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PAR LTA ZHING, DE’I DON GOMS PAR BYED PA NA RNAL ‘BYOR PA DE ‘KHOR BA LAS RNAM PAR GROL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

As such, let’s consider that deep practitioner who sees that both the self and what belongs to the self are empty of existing through any nature of their own; and who then undertakes to accustom themselves to this fact.  This then is a person who is completely liberated from the cycle of suffering.


[3580]
GZUGS LA SOGS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MA DMIGS PA NA, GZUGS LA SOGS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR RTOG PA’I CHAGS SOGS KYI NYON MONGS RNAMS ZAD PAR ‘GYUR BAS,

Suppose that we no longer look at form and the rest as being things that could exist through some nature of their own.  In that case, negative thoughts such as attachment and the rest—thoughts where we imagine that form and such could indeed exist through some nature of their own—will come to a stop.


[3581]
NYAN RANG RNAMS YANG SRID LEN PA MED PAR MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ LA, BYANG SEMS NI DE ‘DRA BA’I BDAG MED PA MTHONG DU ZIN KYANG, SNYING RJE’I GZHAN GYI DBANG GIS BYANG CHUB KYI BAR DU SRID PA’I RGYUN GYI SKYE BA ‘DZIN PAR BYED DO,,

Bodhisattvas have long since seen that kind of lack of a self-nature which the listeners and self-made buddhas use to reach the nirvana where they no longer have to take a rebirth.  But since they live at the mercy of thoughts of compassion, these bodhisattvas will still work to take a birth in the flow of lifetimes, until such time as they reach enlightenment.


[3582]
DE LTAR THEG PA CHE CHUNG GNYIS KA’I LAM GYI GNAD DAM PA YIN PA’I PHYIR MKHAS PAS JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I BDAG MED PA YONGS SU BTZAL BAR BYA’O,,

This is a high and holy, crucial point of the paths of both the greater and the lesser way.  As such, wise ones among you should do their utmost to seek out the absence of a self, as we have explained it here.



How the examination follows
for common entities

[3583]
GSUM PA LA GSUM, BUM SNAM SOGS KYI DNGOS PO LA BSGRE BA, RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU’I DNGOS PO LA BSGRE BA, DE LA GZHAN GYI RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our third point from before: the way in which we can apply our examination of the self, and of a wagon, to other entities as well.  This we cover in three different sections: showing how this examination follows for entities such as water pitchers, bolts of cloth, and the like; showing how it follows for the entitites of cause & effect; and then finally refuting any other argument on these points.  Here is the first of these.


	[3584]
[VI.166]
Ghaṭa paṭa kaṭa senāḥ kānanaṃ paṅkti vṛkṣā
gṛha śakaṭa maṭhādyā ye ca kecit padārthāḥ,
Vyavaharati jano’yaṃ yais tathā tān pratīhi
vivadati sa Munīndro yan na lokena sārddham.

,BUM PA SNAM BU RE LDE DMAG DANG
NAGS TSAL PHRENG BA LJON SHING DANG,
,[212b] KHANG KHYIM SHING RTA PHRAN DANG ‘GRON GNAS
LA SOGS DNGOS RNAMS GANG DAG DANG,
,DE BZHIN GANG DAG SGO NAS SKYE ‘DIS
BSNYAD PA DE RNAMS RTOGS BYA STE,
,GANG PHYIR THUB DBANG DE NI ‘JIG RTEN
LHAN CIG RTZOD MI MDZAD PHYIR RO,

Let’s consider
Things like
Water pitchers
And bolts of cloth
And rolls of felt;

As well as
Armies and forests,
And strings of
Beads, and trees [f. 212b].

Or houses and carts,
And meeting places,
And guest houses,
And all such entities;

And in the same vein,
		We should understand
		These things as well:

All those things which
These same people
Would ascribe.

And why is
This the case?
It’s because this
Lord of the Able Ones

Has no argument
With the world.


[VI.167]
Avayava guṇa rāgā lakṣaṇānīndhanādyā
avayaviguṇiraktā lakṣyam agnyādayo’rthāḥ,
Vihita ratha vicārāt saptadhā santi naite
sati tu tad itarasmin santi loka prasiddhyā.

,YAN LAG YON TAN ‘DOD CHAGS MTSAN NYID
DANG NI BUD SHING LA SOGS DANG,
,YON TAN CAN YAN LAG CAN CHAGS DANG
MTSAN GZHI ME LA SOGS DON DAG,
,DE RNAMS SHING RTA’I RNAM DPYAD BYAS PAS
RNAM BDUN YOD PA MA YIN ZHING,
,DE LAS GZHAN DU GYUR PAR ‘JIG RTEN
GRAGS PA’I SGO NAS YOD PA YIN,

		There are
Component parts,
		Qualities,
		Wanting itself,
		Defining characteristics,
		Firewood, and so on;

		And then there are
		The combination
		Of the qualities,
		The whole of
		The component parts,
		The one with the wanting,
		The thing which is defined,
		Fire, and so on.

		We can use the same
		Examination on them
		As we did on the wagon;

		Using the seven options,
		We cannot find
		Anything that exists.

		And if we proceed
		In a different manner,
		They are all things
		That do exist, if only
		In the parlance of
		The everyday world.


[3585]
JI LTAR BDAG DANG DE’I NYE BAR LEN PA’I GDAGS PA RNAMS SHING RTA’I DPYAD PA DANG MTSUNGS PA DE BZHIN DU, DNGOS PO GZHAN RNAMS KYI DPYAD PA YANG YIN NO ZHES BSTAN PA’I PHYIR,

This next section is meant to present the following idea.  When we talk about the ascribed entitites of the self and what it incorporates, things work the same as in the case where we examine a wagon.  We undertake the examination of other entities in just this same manner.


[3586]
GANG DAG BUM PA DANG SNAM BU DANG RE LDE DANG, DMAG DANG NAGS TSAL DANG, ‘PHRENG BA DANG LJON SHING DANG, KHANG KHYIM DANG SHING RTA PHRAN DANG, ‘GRON GNAS LA SOGS PA’I DNGOS PO DE RNAMS SHING RTA’I RNAM [f. 242b] PAR DPYAD PAS,

And so let’s consider here things like water pitchers and bolts of cloth and rolls of felt.  And let’s take as well armies and forests.  Let’s consider strings of beads, and trees.  Let’s think on houses, and carts, and meeting places, and guesthouses, and all such entities.  We can use the same examination on them as we did on the wagon.


[3587]
RANG RANG GI BTAGS DON RNAM PA BDUN DU BTZAL BA NA YOD PA MA YIN ZHING, BTZAL BA DE LAS GZHAN DU GYUR PAR TE MA DPYAD PAR ‘JIG RTEN NA GRAGS PA’I SGO NAS YOD PA YIN NO,,

If we search out what it is that got the name in each of these cases, using the seven different options, we cannot find anything that exists.  And if we proceed with our search in a different manner—meaning, if we leave off that kind of examination—then they are all simply things that do exist, if only in the parlance of the everyday world.


[3588]
SHING RTA PHRAN LA BOD KYI BLA MA KHA CIG ,SHA KA KRA NI ‘KHOR LO CAN TE SHING RTA’I PHRAN JA SIG GSUM TZAM ‘GEL BA STE, DE YANG ‘KHOR LO DANG BAR YANG YOD PA’I KHANG PA GCIG YIN ZER RO,,

As for certain wording in the Tibetan translation of the verse here—shing ta tren—some teachers in Tibet have claimed that the Sanskrit term shakakra means “a vehicle with wheels,” referring to a supporting structure consisting of the three of wood and case and straps.  They would say then that it refers to both to the cart and to a small cabin in the middle of the coach.


[3589]
DE BZHIN TE DE LTA BU’I RIGS CAN GYI DNGOS PO GZHAN GANG DAG GI SGO NAS SKYE BO ‘DIS BSNYAD PA STE THA SNYAD BTAGS PA DE RNAMS KYANG, MI BRTAGS PA’I GRAGS PA KHO NAR YOD PAR RTOGS PAR BYA STE,

And so in the same vein we can consider other entities of this same general category: all those things which these same people would ascribe—or give a label—in a similar manner.  We should understand that all of these things as well exist only in an unexamined way, according to the general parlance.


[3590]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA THUB PA’I DBANG PO DE NI ‘JIG RTEN DANG LHAN CIG ‘JIG RTEN LA MI MTHUN PA’I RTZOD PA MI MDZAD PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR TE,

And why—for what reason—is this the case?  It’s because this very Lord of the Able Ones has made the statement that “I have no argument with the world”; which is to say, nothing against the way of the world at large.


[3591]
DKON BRTZEGS KYI SDOM PA GSUM BSTAN PA LAS, ‘JIG RTEN NGA DANG LHAN CIG RTZOD KYI, NGA NI ‘JIG RTEN DANG MI RTZOD DO,

And in fact we do see the statement, in the presentation of the three sets of vows in the Pile of Jewels, that—

	The world may argue with me,
	But I have no argument with the world.


[3592]
ZHES ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD GNOD MED KYIS YOD PAR BZHAG PA RNAMS, THUB PAS KYANG ZHAL GYIS BZHES PAR GSUNGS PAS NA, ‘JIG RTEN GYI GRAGS PA LA GNOD PAR MI BYA’O,,

What this is saying is that those things which are established as existing by the world at large, through the unmistaken naming of objects, are also fully accepted by the Able Ones.  As such, their positions do not draw into question what the world in general says of things.


[3593]
GANG YANG ‘JIG RTEN PA RNAMS DNGOS PO GANG DAG GIS JI LTAR THA SNYAD ‘DOGS ZHE NA,

One might then ask just how it is that those of the world do their labeling of things.


[3594]
DE BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA, JI LTAR BUM PA YAN LAG CAN DANG GYO MO LA SOGS PA DE’I YAN LAG DANG, BUM PA YON TAN CAN YIN LA, ME RIS SNGO BSANGS LA SOGS PA DE’I YON TAN DANG,

The next section here is meant to explain this point.  A water pitcher for example constitutes the whole of its component parts; and the shards of clay and such constitute those parts.  A water pitcher is also the combination of its qualities, and things like the greenish blue hue of the glaze on the pitcher are its qualities.


[3595]
YID DU ‘ONG BA’I YUL LA CHAGS PA’I SEMS CAN NAM GANG ZAG ‘DOD CHAGS KYI RTEN NI CHAGS PA DANG, ZAG BCAS KYI YUL [f. 243a] YID DU ‘ONG BA LA DMIGS NAS LHAG PAR SRED PA NI ‘DOD CHAGS DANG,

A living being, or person, who is attached to an attractive object—the one who serves as the basis of the desire—is the one with wanting; while the wanting itself is that craving that comes when they focus upon an impure but attractive object.


[3596]
BUM PA NI MTSAN GZHI DANG, LTO BA LDIR BA DANG MCHU ‘PHYANG BA MGRIN PA RING BA LA SOGS PA DAG DE’I MTSAN NYID DANG,

A water pitcher is the thing which is defined; while the rounded belly, the protruding spout, and the lengthened neck of the pitcher and such are its defining characteristics.


[3597]
ME NI SREG PAR BYED PA DANG, BUD SHING NI BSREG PAR BYA BA LA SOGS PA NI,

Fire is the thing that acts to burn; while firewood is the thing that is burned; and so on.


[3598]
YAN LAG LA BRTEN NAS YAN LAG CAN DANG, YAN LAG CAN LA BRTEN NAS YAN LAG TU ‘DOGS TE, DE BZHIN DU MED {%ME} DANG BUD SHING GI BAR DU PHAN TSUN BRTEN NAS ‘DOGS PA’I BAR DU’O,,

The whole of the component parts is always labeled upon its component parts; and the component parts are labeled upon the whole of the component parts.  And everything on up to the fire and firewood is labelled in mutual dependence.


[3599]
‘DI RNAMS KYI BTAGS DON RNAM PA BDUN DU BTZAL BA NA MED KYANG YOD PAR ‘JOG NUS PA NI, ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD KYIS YIN GYI, DE KHO NA NYID LA DPYOD PA’I RIGS PA’I DPYAD RA MI GZHUG GO

When we look in those seven different ways for what was given the label, we cannot find it—and yet we are able to establish that the thing exists.  This is all due to the verbiage of the everyday world; but none of it stands up under the logic we use to investigate suchness.



How the examination follows
for cause & effect

[3600]
,GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second part from above: showing how this examination follows for entitites of cause & effect.


	[3601]
[VI.168]
Janayati yadi hetur janyam evaṃ sa hetur
na janayati phalaṃ cet tad vinā hetukaḥ syāt,
Phalam api sati hetau jāyate yena tasmāt
kathaya bhavatu pūrvaṃ kiṃ kuto yad yataḥ syāt.

,GAL TE RGYU YIS BSKYED PAR BYA SKYED
DE LTA NA DE RGYU YIN ZHING,
,GAL TE ‘BRAS BU MI SKYED NA NI
DE MED RGYU MED CAN DU ‘GYUR,
,’BRAS BU YANG NI RGYU YOD GYUR NA
SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA DE YI PHYIR,
,GANG LAS GANG ZHIG ‘GYUR BA GANG ZHIG
LAS SNGAR GANG ZHIG ‘GYUR BA SMROS,

		Suppose a cause
		Were to give rise
		To what it acts
		To instigate.

		In this case,
		The cause
		Would be that.

		If it did not act
		To trigger a result,
		Then with
		Nothing such,
		
		It would be one
		Which had no cause.

		The result as well—
		If there is a cause—
		Will grow.

		Thus then
		Whatever could
		Either one
		Occur from?

		Please describe
		To us which of these
		Is earlier, and which
		Could occur.


[3602]
YAN LAG LA SOGS PA RNAMS PHAN TSUN LTOS PA’I GRUB PA YIN PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GNYIS KYANG PHAN TSUN LTOS NAS GRUB PA YIN NO ZHES BSHAD PA,

This next section is meant to explain how not only is it the case that the component parts of things exist in reliance upon each other; but that causes and effects as well exist in this kind of mutual reliance as well.


[3603]
GANG GI PHYIR NA GAL TE RGYU YIS BSKYED PAR BYA BA ‘BRAS BU SKYED PA DE LTA NA SKYED BYED DE RGYU YIN ZHING, GAL TE ‘BRAS BU MI SKYED NA NI SKYED PA DE MED PAS, ‘BRAS BU DE RGYU MED PA CAN DU ‘GYUR RO,,

Here is the reasoning at this point.  Suppose a cause were to give rise to the result that it acts to instigate.  In this case the cause would be that particular trigger here.  If it did not act to trigger a result, then since there was no such trigger the result would come to be one which had no cause.


[3604]
‘BRAS BU YANG NI RGYU YOD PAR GYUR NA, DE LAS SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA DE YI PHYIR RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS KYANG PHAN TSUN LTOS NAS YOD PA YIN GYI, RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN NO,,

The result as well, from its side, is such that—if there is a cause—then it will grow from that cause.  Thus then the pair of causes & results are things that exist in a mutual dependence—but cannot be said to exist through some nature of their own.


[3605]
CI STE RGYU ‘BRAS RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PAR SEMS NA,

And suppose now that you think to yourself that causes & effects could exist through some essential nature of their own.


[3606]
KYE RGYU’AM ‘BRAS BU GANG LA BRTEN NAS DE GNYIS GANG ZHIG TU ‘GYUR BA GANG ZHIG STE DE GNYIS LAS SNGAR RGYU GANG ZHIG GAM ‘BRAS BU GANG ZHIG ‘GYUR BA DE SMROS SHIG

Goodness!  Whatever cause or effect then could either one of these two rely upon to occur?  Please describe to us which of these two could occur earlier as some cause; and which of them could occur as a result.


[3607]
[f. 243b] DE LTA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA LA RGYU SNGA BA MI RIGS TE, RGYU’I DUS SU RGYU’I LTOS SA ‘BRAS BU DE GRUB DGOS PAS SO,,

If things were like that, and they existed through some nature of their own, then it would be illogical to say that the cause had come earlier—since there would have had to exist a result in the same time period as the cause, for the cause to rely upon.


[3608]
‘BRAS BU SNGA BA YANG MI RIGS TE RGYU MED DU ‘GYUR BAS SO,,

But neither could you say that the result were there before; since then it could have no cause.


[3609]
DE’I PHYIR RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BUR GDAGS PA YANG SHING RTA LTAR PHAN TSUN BRTEN NAS GRUB PAR RIG PAR BYA’I RANG BZHIN LAS GYUR PA NI MA YIN NO,,

As such then we should understand the labelling of causes and effects as being something that occurs in a mutual dependence, as we saw with the wagon.  It is not though something that could occur through any nature of its own.


	[3610]
[VI.169]
Janayati yadi hetuḥ prāpya kāryaṃ tadā te
na janaka phala bhedaḥ syāt tayor aikya śakteḥ,
Pṛthag ayam aviśiṣṭo’hetubhiḥ syāc ca hetur
dvayam idam avadhūyānyāsatī kalpanā ca.

,GAL TE KHYOD KYI RGYU YIS PHRAD NAS
‘BRAS SKYED BYED NA DE YI TSE,
,DE DAG NUS PA GCIG PAS SKYED BYED
‘BRAS BU THA DAD MED ‘GYUR ZHING,
,SO SOR NA NI RGYU ‘DI RGYU MIN
RNAMS DANG KHYAD PAR MED ‘GYUR LA,
,GNYIS PO ‘DI DAG SPANGS NAS RTOG PA
GZHAN YANG YOD PAR ‘GYUR MA YIN,

		Let’s suppose
		You respond that
		The cause acts to
		Trigger the result
		
		Through making contact
		With that result.

		In this case then
		These two would
		Constitute a 
Single force.

If so, the trigger
And the result
Would become
Inseparable.

And suppose
They are
Completely separate.

There wouldn’t be
Anything about the cause
That distinguished it
From things that
Weren’t the cause.

They have given up
These two; and there
Is further no different
Idea which could exist.


[3611]
GZHAN YANG GAL TE RGYU YIS ‘BRAS BU RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYED PAR BYED NA, ‘BRAS BU DANG PHRAD NAS SAM MA PHRAD PAR SKYED PAR BYED,

And suppose, further, that it were indeed the case that a cause could trigger a result through some nature of its own.  Would you say that it triggers the result through making contact with it, or without making contact with it?


[3612]
DE LA GAL TE KHYOD KYI LTAR NA RGYU YIS ‘BRAS BU DANG PHRAD NAS ‘BRAS BU SKYED PAR BYED NA, DE YI TSE RGYU ‘BRAS DE DAG NUS PA GCIG TU ‘GYUR TE, KLUNG DANG RGYA MTSO’I CHU PHRAD PA BZHIN NO,,

Let’s suppose you respond that on this point, the cause acts to trigger the result through making contact with that result.  In this case then these two—the cause and the effect—would constitute a single force; similar to what we see when the waters of a river and the ocean meet with each other.


[3613]
GCIG TU SONG NA ‘DI NI RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU’O ZHES DBYE BAR MI NUS TE, SKYED BYED DANG ‘BRAS BU THA DAD MED PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR GANG GIS GANG ZHIG SKYED PAR GYUR,

But if indeed they became one, then we would be unable to distinguish one from the other, saying “This is it the cause, and that is the result.”  That is, the trigger and the result would become inseparable; and then which would you say is triggering the other?


[3614]
CI STE SO SOR TE MA PHRAD PAR SKYED NA NI, ‘BRAS BU’I RGYUR ‘DOD PA ‘DI, DE’I RGYU MIN PA RNAMS DANG SKYED MI SKYED KHYAD PAR MED PAR ‘GYUR TE, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SO SO BA RNAMS ‘BREL MED DON GZHAN DU ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

And suppose that the the triggering is done without any contact between them at all; they are completely separate.  In that case there wouldn’t be anything about the thing that you asserted was the cause of the result that distinguished it from things that weren’t the cause, as far as what did the triggering and what didn’t do the triggering.  And that’s because things that exist through some nature of their own, and which are separate from one another, are different entitites which share no connection at all.


[3615]
RGYU ‘BRAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR SMRA BA LA BSKYED BYA SKYED BYED LA PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI RTOG PA GNYIS PO ‘DI DAG SPANGS NAS TE DE MA GTOGS PA’I RTOG PA GSUM PA GZHAN YANG YOD PAR ‘GYUR BA MA YIN PAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RGYUS ‘BRAS BU MI SKYED PA KHO NA’O,,

Those who assert that causes and effects can exist through some nature of their own have given up these two ideas: that these—what is triggered and what does the triggering—could either make contact with each other, or never make contact with each other.  And yet there is further no different, third idea—one other than those two—which could exist.  Thus it can only be the case that a cause which existed through some nature of its own could never trigger a result.


	[3616]
[VI.170]
Phalam atha tava hetur no karotītyato’sat
phalam iti phalahīno’hetuko san na hetuḥ,
Dvayam idam api māyā saṃnibhaṃ yena tasmād
bhavati na mama doṣo laukikāḥ santi cārthāḥ.

,CI STE KHYOD KYI RGYU YIS ‘BRAS BU
SKYED PAR MI BYED DE PHYIR ‘BRAS,
,ZHES BYA YOD MIN ‘BRAS BRAL RGYU NI
RGYU MED CAN ‘GYUR YOD PA’ANG MIN,
,GANG PHYIR ‘DI DAG GNYIS CHAR YANG NI
SGYU MA DANG ‘DRA DE YI PHYIR,
,BDAG LA SKYON DU MI ‘GYUR ‘JIG RTEN
PA YI DNGOS PO RNAMS KYANG YOD,

		As such, this cause
		Of yours could never
		Act to trigger a result.

		And as such,
		There is no such thing
		As something that
You could refer to
		As a “result.”

		Devoid of a result,
		The cause would be
		Without any reason;

		And that is also
Something that
Could never be.

And suppose
It were the case;
These two would also be
Similar to an illusion.

As such,
The problem
That has been raised

		Does not apply
		To me.

		These things
		Of the world
		Do, further, exist.


[3617]
DE’I PHYIR CI STE KHYOD KYI LTAR RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RGYU YIS ‘BRAS BU SKYED PAR MI BYED PA DE’I PHYIR ‘BRAS BU ZHES BYA BA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN LA,

As such, given that, this cause which according to you exists through some nature of its own could never act to trigger a result.  And as such, we would have to say that there is no such thing as something you could refer to as a “result” which existed through some nature of its own.


[3618]
RGYU RGYU NYID DU ‘JOG PA’I RGYU [f. 244a] MTSAN NI, ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA YIN NA GAL TE ‘BRAS BU DANG BRAL BA STE MED PAR YANG RGYU RGYU NYID DU ‘JOG NUS NA NI, DE’I TSE RGYU NI RGYUR ‘JOG PA’I RGYU MTSAN MED PA CAN DU ‘GYUR NA,

The very reason that we can say that any cause is a particular cause is that a result is produced.  And suppose that it were possible to say that a cause was a particular cause devoid of—in the absence of—a result.  In that case, the cause would be established as a cause without any reason for it to be established as such.


[3619]
‘DI NI YOD PA’ANG MIN TE, DE’I PHYIR RGYU ‘BRAS GNYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA MIN NO,,

That is also something that could never be; as such, these two—causes & effects—are not things that could ever exist through some nature of their own.


[3620]
‘O NA KHYOD KYI LTAR NA JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

One may then respond with the following question:

Well then, according to your view, how does all of this really work?


[3621]
RGOL BA GANG GI LTAR NA BSKYED BYA SKYED BYED GNYIS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR ‘DOD PA DE LA, RGYUS ‘BRAS BU DANG PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI BRTAG PA BYAS NAS PHYOGS GNYIS KA LA SKYON DU ‘GYUR BA YIN GYI,

So suppose we have some debater here who asserts that these two—what is triggered, and what does the triggering—could exist by definition.  When we proceed from here and examine whether the cause ever makes contact with the result or not, we get problems on both sides.


[3622]
GANG GI PHYIR GANG GI LTAR NA DNGOS PO RNAMS LOG PAR KUN BRTAGS PA’I DBANG GIS BSKYED CING THA SNYAD TZAM GYI RTOG PAS BZHAG PA’I PHYIR, RGYU ‘BRAS ‘DI DAG GNYIS CAR YANG NI SGYU MA DANG ‘DRA BAR RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA YIN ZHING,

And suppose it were the case—suppose it could be—that entities could be triggered in some wrong way, in a way which were only ascribed.  Suppose that they could be established only in terms, through concepts.  In that case, these two—cause & effect—would also both be similar to an illusion; which is to say, things that had never grown through any nature of their own. 


[3623]
RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED KYANG RAB RIB CAN GYIS DMIGS PA’I SGRA {%SKRA} SHAD LA SOGS PA LTAR, THA SNYAD PA’I RNAM PAR RTOG PA TZAM GYIS ‘JOG PA’I YUL DU ‘GYUR BA LA NI, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I RGYU ‘BRAS KHAS LEN PA LA BKOD PA’I SKYON MTSUNGS PA BSAM DU MED PA NYID DO,,

And so let’s consider an object which is established only through concepts involving terms—something which is like the strand of hair that someone with cataracts perceives, even though it cannot exist through any nature of its own.  It is not at all the case that we are thinking to posit here a problem which would be equivalent, for a person who accepted the idea that cause & effect could exist through some nature of its own.


[3624]
DE YI PHYIR BDAG LA JI SKAD BSHAD PA’I PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI SKYON DU MI ‘GYUR ZHING, ‘JIG RTEN LA GRAGS PA YI DNGOS PO MA BRTAGS PAR GRUB PA RGYU ‘BRAS DANG SHING RTA LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYANG YOD PAS THAMS CAD ‘GRUB BO,,

As such, the problem that has been raised—about these things making contact or not making contact—does not apply to me.  All these things that are spoken of in the vernacular of the world, existing without being examined—cause & effect, and wagons, and all the like—do, further, exist.  As such, everything is right there.


[3625]
‘DIR ‘GREL PAS DGAG BYA’I KHYAD PAR RANG BZHIN GYIS DANG RANG GI NGO BOS GRUB PA SOGS KYI RGYU ‘BRAS LA GNOD PA BRJOD PA, RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PA SGYU MA LTAR SMRA BA LA TSUR LA BZLOG NA MI ‘JUG CES SMRA DGOS PA YIN [f. 244b] GYI,

At this point in the autocommentary, problems are raised with cause & effect which are specified by applying a distinction of something being denied: “those that exist through some nature of their own,” or “those that exist through some essential nature.”  That is, we need to mention phrases like “which do not exist through any nature of their own,” or “which resemble an illusion,” so that the same arguments cannot be turned back upon us.


[3626]
RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DANG YOD PA GNYIS KYI KHYAD PAR MA PHYED PA’I LAN LTAR SNANG ‘BA’ ZHIG ‘DEBS PA MI BYA’O,,

We should not here though fail to apply the distinction between existing through some nature of its own and existing in general; if we did make such replies, then they would only be mistaken ones.



An argument that
the problems are just the same

[3627]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, RGYU ‘BRAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA LA SKYON MTSUNGS PA’I RTZOD PA, RANG LA SKYON MI MTSUNGS PA’I LAN BSTAN PA’O,,

This brings us to our third point from above—refuting any other argument on these points.  This we will cover in two parts: argument that the problems are just the same with the denial that cause & effect could exist through any nature of its own; and presenting a response which shows that the problems are not the same with our position.


[3628]
DANG PO NI, ‘DIR RGYU ‘BRAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA BKAG PA’I LAN DU, KHA CIG ‘DI SKAD DU RGYUS ‘BRAS BU SKYED PA LA PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI BRTAG PA BYED PA NI KHYED LA YANG MTSUNGS SO,,

Someone comes now to respond to our denial that cause & effect could exist through some nature of its own.  This person would say, “This approach of examining whether or not the cause makes contact with the result when it triggers that result applies to you, just the same.”


	[3629]
[VI.171]
Dūṣyaṃ vidūṣayati dūṣaṇam āpya caitad
aprāpya ceti nanu caiṣa tavāpi doṣaḥ,
Svaṃ pakṣam eva vinihaṃsi vadan yadaivaṃ
dūṣyaṃ tadāsi na hi dūṣayituṃ samarthaḥ.

,SUN ‘BYIN ‘DIS SUN DBYUNG BYA PHRAD NAS
‘BYIN NAM MA PHRAD PAR,
,YIN ZHES NYES PA ‘DIR NI KHYOD LA’ANG
‘GYUR BA MA YIN NAM,
,GANG TSE DE SKAD SMRA ZHING RANG PHYOGS
KHO NA RNAM ‘JOMS PA,
,DE TSE KHYOD KYIS SUN DBYUNG SUN NI
‘BYIN PAR NUS MA YIN,

		When you attack
		My position,

		Is it through
		Making contact
		With what it attacks,

		Or without 
		Making contact?

		Doesn’t the problem
		Stated also apply
		To you yourself?

		Let’s consider a case
		Of expressing just such, 
		Which ends up destroying
		Only their own position.

		In this situation,
		It is not the case
		That your attack is
		Anything with the ability

		To do any successful
		Attacking at all.


[3630]
JI LTAR ZHE NA, KHYOD KYI SUN ‘BYIN PA ‘DIS SUN DBYUNG BYA PHRAD NAS SUN ‘BYIN NAM, MA PHRAD PAR SUN ‘BYIN PA YIN ZHES PA’I NYES PA ‘DI NI KHYOD LA’ANG ‘GYUR BA MA YIN NAM STE YIN TE,

And how is that?  Let me ask you a question.  When you attack my position, does your attack attack my position through making contact with what it attacks, or does it attack my position without making contact with what it attacks?  Doesn’t the problem that you have stated also apply to you yourself?  Of course it does!


[3631]
‘DI LTAR GAL TE PHRAD NAS SUN ‘BYIN NA GCIG TU ‘GYUR BAS GANG GIS GANG SUN ‘BYIN,

Suppose you reply that your attack attacks my position by making contact with it.  In that case, the two would have to be the same thing.  And in that case, what would be attacking what?


[3632]
‘ON TE MA PHRAD PAR SUN ‘BYIN NA NI, MA PHRAD PAR MTSUNGS PA THAMS CAD KYIS SUN ‘BYIN PAR ‘GYUR BAS MI RIGS LA, BRTAG PA GNYIS PO ‘DI LAS GZHAN PA’I BRTAG PA GSUM PA YANG MED DO,,

And suppose your attack attacks my position without making any contact with it.  In that case, it would attack every other position in the universe that was also the same, in not making contact with it—and so it just doesn’t make sense.  And furthermore there is no third way of examining the question, beyond these two ways.


[3633]
DE LTAR BYAS NA KHYOD KYI SUN ‘BYIN PA LA SUN DBYUNG BYA SUN ‘BYIN PA’I NUS PA MED PAS, KHYOD KYI SUN ‘BYIN NYID SUN PHYUNG BA YIN PAS SHUGS KYIS NA RGYU ‘BRAS KYI DNGOS PO YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NYID DO ZHES BRTAN PA’I {%both editions say brtan pa’i here} PHYIR SMRAS PA,

As such, we can say that your attack has no power to attack any idea at all to be attacked.  And that means that your attack is itself attacked.  And as such, the implication is that entities of cause & effect are indeed quite precisely things that exist through some nature of their own; we can say it then ever more firmly.


[3634]
GANG GI TSE SUN ‘BYIN LTAR SNANG DE SKAD SMRA ZHING RANG GI PHYOGS KHO NA RNAM PAR ‘JOMS PA DE’I TSE KHYOD KYIS GZHAN GYI LUGS SUN DBYUNG BAR BYA BA SUN NI ‘BYIN PAR NUS PA MA YIN NO,,

And so let’s consider a case when someone is expressing just such a faulty attack, which ends up destroying only their own position.  In this situation, it is not the case that your attack of your opponent’s position is anything with the ability to do any successful attacking at all.


	[3635]
[VI.172]
Jātyantaraiḥ svavacane’pi samaprasaṅgair
nyāyaṃ vinā’pavadase sakalān padārthān,
Yasmāt tato na khalu sajjana saṃmato’si
vaitaṇḍiko’si ca yato’sti na te svapakṣaḥ.

,GANG PHYIR RANG GI TSIG LA’ANG THAL BA
MTSUNGS PA’I LTAG CHOD KYIS,
,RIGS PA MED PAR DNGOS MTHA’ DAG LA
SKUR ‘DEBS DE YI PHYIR,
,KHYOD NI SKYE BO DAM PAS BZHED MI
‘GYUR ZHING GANG GI PHYIR,
,KHYOD LA RANG PHYOGS MED PAS SUN CI
PHYIN DU RGOL BA’ANG YIN,

		What’s the case here
		Is of a statement
		Of necessary consequence
		
		Whose resulting implication
		Applies equally as well.

		This failure of reasoning
		Represents a dismissal
		Of all the entities
		That exist;

		As such,
		Your position
		Could not represent
		The stance of
		The holy ones.

		The fact is that,
		For you,
		Suppose one
		Has no position
		Of their own;

		What then are
		They debating for?


[3636]
GZHAN YANG GANG GI PHYIR NA RGOL BA RANG GI TSIG LA’ANG PHYIR RGOL GZHAN LA ‘PHANGS PA’I THAL BA MTSUNGS PA’I LTAG CHOD KYIS TE [f. 245a] SUN ‘BYIN LTAR SNANG GIS,

Moreover, what’s actually the case here is that one debater is attempting to attack their opponent by using a statement of necessary consequence whose resulting implication—meant to apply to the opponent—applies equally as well to their own expression.  And this makes the attack itself a faulty one.


[3637]
RIGS PA MED PAR DNGOS PO MTHA’ DAG LA SKUR PA ‘DEBS PA DE’I PHYIR KHYOD NI SKYE BO DAM PAS BZHED PA STE ‘DOD PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

This failure of reasoning represents a dismissal of all the entities that exist; as such, your position could not represent the stance—or the accepted thinking—of the holy ones.


[3638]
JI LTAR ZHE NA, MA PHRAD PAR SKYED NA MA PHRAD PAR MTSUNGS PA THAMS CAD KYIS SKYED DGOS PA LA, DE DAG GIS SKYED PA MA YIN NO ZHES BYA BA ‘DI LA RIGS PA CI ZHIG YOD,

And how would that be the case?  If something were to trigger another thing without making contact with it, then it would necessarily trigger everything else in the universe that was equivalent, in not making contact with it.  That is, what logic could you ever show to say that things like this didn’t trigger those others?


[3639]
‘DI LTAR KHAB LONG GIS MA PHRAD PA NYID DU RUNG BA’I YUL NA GNAS PA’I LCAGS ‘DREN PAR BYED KYI MA PHRAD PA THAMS CAD NI MI ‘DREN LA, MIG GIS KYANG MA PHRAD PA KHO NAR RUNG BA’I YUL NA GNAS PA’I GZUGS MTHONG GIS, MA PHRAD PA THAMS CAD MI MTHONG BA

Think of a magnet.  It acts to attract iron filings located at an appropriate distance—even though it makes no contact with them; but we cannot go further and say that it attracts everything there is that it makes no contact with.  The eye also sees, exclusively, those forms that it makes no contact with, assuming they are in the appropriate locale.  It does not though see everything there is that it doesn’t make contact with.


[3640]
DE BZHIN DU, RGYUS KYANG MA PHRAD PAR SKYED DU ZIN KYANG MA PHRAD PA THAMS CAD SKYED PAR MI ‘GYUR GYI, ‘BRAS BU RUNG BA KHO NA SKYED PAR BYED DO,,

Just so, even though it is the case that a cause can—without making contact—trigger something, it’s not the case that it would trigger everything there is that it didn’t make contact with.  That is, causes only act to trigger those things that are appropriate to be their results.


[3641]
GZHAN YANG GANG GI PHYIR KHYOD NI SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA NYID DU YANG ‘GYUR TE, RANG GI PHYOGS BZHAG PA DANG BRAL ZHING GZHAN PHYOGS SEL BA TZAM LA ZHUGS PA’I RGOL BA NI SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA PA ZHES BYA NA, KHYOD KYANG DE LTAR GNAS PA’I PHYIR RO ZHE NA,

And moreover, the fact is that there is further perfect debate which we can express to your attack.  Suppose that a debater has no position of their own which they have chosen to take, and they confine themselves only to attempting to overthrow some other’s position.  What then are they debating for; why are they making their attack?  And we would say that you are in the very same situation here.

This then is the position that the other party takes.



How we accept,
nominally, the attack

[3642]
GNYIS PA LA BZHI, RANG GI PHYOGS LA SUN ‘BYIN DANG SGRUB PA ‘THAD TSUL, GZHAN GYI THAL BA MI MTSUNGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN GSAL BAR BSHAD PA, RANG BZHIN MED PA BSGRUB NUS PA BZHIN DU GZHAN GYIS BZLOG STE BSGRUB MI NUS PA, ‘DIR MA BSHAD PA’I SUN ‘BYIN LHAG MA SHES PAR BYED TSUL LO,,

This brings us to the second section from above, which is presenting a response which shows that the problems are not the same with our own position.  Here we proceed in four parts: (1) demonstrating how the attack and the proof utilized in our own position are correct; (2) a clear explanation of the reason why our position is not equivalent to the statement of a necessary implication for the other party; (3) a demonstration of how—so long as we are able to establish that things have no nature of their own—the other party will be unable to prove any denial of our position; and (4) showing how we can understand additional attacks that have not been explained here so far.


[3643]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, THA SNYAD DU GZHAN PHYOGS SUN ‘BYIN PA KHAS LEN TSUL DANG, RANG GI PHYOGS SGRUB PA KHAS LEN TSUL LO, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these has two topics of its own: how it is that we accept, nominally, the attack of the opposing position; and how it is that we accept the proof of our own position.  Here is the first.


	[3644]
[VI.173]
Aprāpya dūṣayati dūṣaṇam eva yasya
prāpyātha dūṣyam iti vā niyamena pakṣaḥ,
Syāt tasya doṣa udito’yam ayaṃ tu pakṣo
nāstīti naiṣa mama sambhavati prasaṅgaḥ.

,SUN ‘BYIN PAS SUN DBYUNG BYA MA PHRAD
SUN NI ‘BYIN BYED DAM,
,’ON TE [213a] PHRAD NAS YIN ZHES SMRAS ZIN
NYES PA ‘DIR GANG LA,
,NGES PAR PHYOGS YOD DE LA ‘GYUR GYI
BDAG LA PHYOGS ‘DI NI,
,YOD PA MIN PAS THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA
‘DI NI SRID MA YIN,

		First there is
		The problem that
		Has already been raised,

		Of whether the attack
		Serves to attack the idea
		Which is attacked

		Without making contact
		With it, or by making
		Contact with it [f. 213a].

		Here it arises
		With that person who
		Surely has a position;

		We though
		Do not take
		Any such position;

		As such,
		This statement of
		A necessary consequence

		Is not something
		Which is even possible.	


[3645]
‘DI LA BRJOD PAR [f. 245b] BYA STE, SUN ‘BYIN PAS SUN DBYUNG BYA MA PHRAD PAR SUN NI ‘BYIN PAR BYED DAM, ‘ON TE PHRAD NAS SUN ‘BYIN PAR BYED PA YIN ZHES SNGAR SMRAS ZIN PA’I NYES PA NI,

And so here we will describe the point.  Let’s consider first the problem that has already been raised, where we ask the question of whether the attack serves to attack the idea which is attacked without making contact with it, or whether it serves to attack this idea by making contact with it.


[3646]
‘DIR RGOL BA GANG LA PHYOGS YOD PA STE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I DON DAM ‘CHA’ BA DE LA SKYON DU ‘GYUR GYI, 

Here a problem arises with that person who has a position; which is to say, with a person who is asserting that there is an object which could exist through some nature of its own.


[3647]
BDAG LA RANG BZHIN KYIS GRUB PA’I DON DAM ‘CHA’ BA’I PHYOGS ‘DI NI YOD PA MIN PAS, PHRAD MA PHRAD GNYIS KA LA SKYON BSTAN PA’I THAL BAR ‘GYUR BA ‘DI NI, BDAG LA SRID PA MA YIN TE, NGED KYI LTAR NA SUN ‘BYUNG BYA DANG SUN ‘BYIN PA GNYIS KA RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PAR KHAS LEN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

We though do not take any such position wherein we assert that there is any object which could exist through some nature of its own.  As such, this statement of a necessary consequence presenting the problems of both making contact or not making contact is not something which is even possible for us.  And that’s because—according to us—one should accept the idea that neither the idea which is attacked nor the attacking itself is something that could exist through some nature of its own.


[3648]
‘GREL PAR SNGAR GZHAN GYI PHYOGS LA RGYUS ‘BRAS BU SKYED PA LA PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI BRTAG PA BYAS PA’I SKYON RANG LA MI MTSUNGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN DU,

The autocommentary gives a particular reason why the problems that arose earlier, as we investigated whether the other side asserted that—when a cause triggers a result—it did so through making contact with that result, or not, do not apply to ourselves.


[3649]
PHA ROL POS RGYU ‘BRAS RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PAR KHAS BLANGS LA, RANG GIS RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA’I SGYU MA BZHIN DU KHAS BLANGS PA BKOD DO,,

And that is that when our opponent has accepted cause & effect that could exist by definition, we present to them our position, that these are things that cannot exist by themselves, through some kind of self-nature; but are, rather, similar to an illusion.


[3650]
SKABS ‘DIR YANG GZHAN LA ‘PHANGS PA’I SKYON RANG LA MI ‘ONG BA’I RGYU MTSAN DU RANG BZHIN GYIS MA GRUB PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS RANG LA MI MTSUNGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN NI, PHYOGS GNYIS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHAS MI LEN PA YIN PAR GDON MI ZA BAR ‘DOD PAR BYA’O,,

What’s being said here is “the reason that the problems which are implied by the positions of the others do not apply to ourselves is that these things do not exist through any nature of their own.”  That is, we would beyond any doubt have to say that the reason why these issues do not apply to ourselves in an equivalent way is that we would never accept the idea that either possibility existed through any nature of its own.


[3651]
DE’I PHYIR RTZOD ZLOG LAS,
,GAL TE NGAS DAM BCAS ‘GA’ YOD,
,DES NA NGA LA SKYON DE YOD,
,NGA LA DAM BCA’ MED PAS NA,
,NGA LA SKYON MED KHO NA YIN, 
ZHES SOGS KYIS DAM BCA’ DANG PHYOGS MED PAR GSUNGS PA THAMS CAD KYI DON YANG SNGAR [f. 246a] BZHIN SHES PAR BYA’O,,

This then is why we see, in Stopping All Argument, the following lines—

If I had
Any position at all,
Then I would have
Those problems.

But since I don’t
Have any position,
I am completely faultless.

And as always, we need to understand as we described it earlier on the meaning of all these kinds of statements that we have no position, or stance that we take.


[3652]
JI SKAD DU RGYAL BA’I YUM LAS, TSE DANG LDAN PA RAB ‘BYOR, CI SKYES PA’I CHOS KYIS MA SKYES PA’I THOB PA ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RAM, ‘ON TE MA SKYES PA’I CHOS KYIS MA SKYES PA’I THOB PA ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR,

The Mother of the Victorious Ones puts it this way—

O junior monk, Subhuti.  Is it the case that things which have started attain the attainment of not having started?  Or is it that things which have not started attain the attainment of not having started?


[3653]
RAB ‘BYOR GYIS SMRAS PA, TSE DANG LDAN PA SH’A RI’I BU KHO BO NI SKYES PA’I CHOS KYIS MA SKYES PA’I THOB PA ‘THOB PAR MI ‘DOD LA, MA SKYES PAS KYANG MA SKYES PA’I THOB PA ‘THOB PAR MI ‘DOD DO,,

	And then Subhuti replied,

O junior monk Shariputra; it is not that I agree to the idea that things which have started have attained the attainment of not having started.  And neither is it the case that I agree that things which have not started have attained the attainment of not having started.


[3654]
SH’A RI’I BUS SMRAS PA, TSE DANG LDAN PA RAB ‘BYOR YANG CI THOB PA MED CING MNGON PAR RTOGS PA MED DAM,

Shariputra said then,

O junior monk Subhuti, would you further say that there is no attaining anything, and that there is no state of realization?


[3655]
RAB ‘BYOR GYIS SMRAS PA, TSE DANG LDAN PA SH’A RI’I BU THOB PA YANG YOD MNGON PAR RTOGS PA YANG YOD MOD KYI, GNYIS KYI TSUL GYIS NI MA YIN NO,,

	And Subhuti replied,

O junior monk Shariputra, it certainly is the case that there is attainment, and that there is realization.  It’s just that they don’t exist in the way of duality.


[3656]
TSE DANG LDAN PA SH’A RI’I BU THOB PA DANG MNGON PAR RTOGS PA NI ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD DU YIN LA, RGYUN DU ZHUGS PA DANG, LAN CIG PHYIR ‘ONG BA DANG, PHYIR MI ‘ONG BA DANG, DGRA BCOM PA DANG, RANG SANGS RGYAS DANG, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ YANG ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD DU YIN GYI,

O junior monk Shariputra, attainment and realization are things that exist in the vernacular of the world.  We can also say that entering the stream; and returning but once; and never returning; and the state of an enemy destroyer; and that of a self-made buddha, and the bodhisattva are all things that exist in the vernacular of the world.


[3657]
DON DAM PAR NI THOB PA MED CING MNGON PAR RTOGS PA MED DO ZHES RGYA CHER GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

In an ultimate sense though, there is no attainment, and there is no realization.

We see a great many such statements in scripture.


[3658]
DE LA MA SKYES PA’I THOB PA ‘THOB PAR MI ‘DOD DO ZHES PA YAN CHAD KYIS, THOB BYA THOB BYED GNYIS KYI BTAGS DON BTZAL BA NA THOB PA MED PAR ‘GYUR BAS, DE LTAR DPYAD PA’I TSE PHYOGS GNYIS KYI SGO NAS THOB BYA ‘THOB PA BKAG CING,

The part here up to “I disagree that there is an attainment of an attainment of not having started,” is meant to express that—when we go looking for what it is that was given the name, for both what we attain and the means by which we attain it, we find that there  is no attainment at all.  As such, when we undertake this kind of examination, we end up denying both what is attained, and the attaining, from both points of view.


[3659]
GNYIS SU DPYAD PA’I THOB BYA YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I DNGOS PO MED PA LA MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR, MA BRTAGS PAR ‘JIG RTEN [f. 246b] GYI THA SNYAD DU THOB PAR KHAS BLANGS PA NI, ‘THOB PA YANG YOD CES PA NAS GNYIS KYI TSUL GYIS NI MA YIN NO, ZHES PAS BSTAN TE, THOB PA ZHES PA NI THOB BYA THOB PA DANG MNGON PAR RTOGS PA LA BYA’O,,

Now it would be illogical to say that something attained which we examined in the two different ways could not exist with an entity that existed through some nature of its own.  As such, accepting the idea of an attainment without examination—in the vernacular of the world—is what’s being indicated from the point of saying that there is an attainmnent, up through saying that it is not something that is there in either of the two ways.  That is, when we speak of an “attainment,” we are referring to the attainment of an attainment, and a realization.


[3660]
DE GNYIS DON DAM PAR MED LA THA SNYAD DU KHAS LEN PA DE BZHIN DU, SUN ‘BYIN BYED KYIS SUN DBYUNG BYA DON DAM PAR SUN MI ‘BYIN KYANG THA SNYAD DU SUN ‘BYIN PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

What we accept then is that neither of these could exist in an ultimate way; but that they exist in a nominal manner.  Just so, we should understand that even though it is not the case that what does the attacking ever succeeds in attacking what is attacked in any ultimate way, it does accomplish the attack in a nominal manner.



How we accept
the proof of
our own position

[3661]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from above, which is how it is that we accept the proof of our own position.


	[3662]
[VI.174]
Dṛṣṭā yathā grahaṇakādiṣu te viśeṣā
āditya maṇḍala gatāḥ pratibimbake’pi,
Nāprāpya cāpya ca raviṃ pratibimba jātaṃ
yuktaṃ pratītya ca bhaved vyavahāra mātram.

,JI LTAR KHYOD KYIS NYI MA’I DKYIL ‘KHOR
LA YOD KHYAD PAR RNAMS,
,GZUGS BRNYAN LA YANG GZAS BZUNG LA SOGS
RNAMS TSE MTHONG ‘GYUR LA,
,NYI MA DANG NI GZUGS BRNYAN RNAM PAR
PHRAD DANG MA PHRAD PAR,
,MI RIGS MOD KYI BRTEN NAS THA SNYAD
TZAM ZHIG ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR ZHING,

		Let’s consider how you
		Can see a reflection,
		
		And based on that
		You can observe
		Certain features

		That are present in
		The disk of the sun.
		
		When there is an eclipse
		Of that sun or
		Something else of the like,
		
		You can watch it.

		Admittedly it is
		Not right that the sun
		Either does make

		Actual contact 
		With the reflection,
		Or not.

		But something
		Did occur, based on it,
		If only nominally.


[VI.175]
Yadvad vyalīkam api tat svamukhopaśobhā-
saṃpādane bhavati tadvad ihāpyavaihi,
Hetoḥ svasādhyagatam ityupapattihīnāt
prajñā mukhoparacanaṃ prati dṛṣṭa śakteḥ.

,MI BDEN BZHIN DU’ANG RANG GI BYAD BZHIN
MDZES PAR BSGRUB BYA’I PHYIR,
,DE NI YOD PA JI LTAR DE BZHIN
‘DIR YANG SHES RAB GDOD {%GDONG},
,SBYANG PAR BYA LA NUS PA MTHONG BAR
‘GYUR BA’I GTAN TSIGS NI,
,’THAD PA DANG BRAL LAS KYANG BSGRUB BYA
RTOGS ZHES SHES PAR BYA,

		It may not be
		The real thing,
		But still it helps us

		To establish the beauty
		Of the original object
		Being reflected.

		As such, it does
		Possess that.

		Here, in the same way,
		We seek to clean
		The face of wisdom.

		And we should
Understand that we
Come to a realization

Of the thesis that we
Are undertaking
To establish

With reasonings too
We would call
Devoid of any
Correctness:

That we can see
Have the force.


[3663]
GZHAN YANG JI LTAR TE DPER NA KHYOD KYIS GZUGS BRNYAN MTHONG BA LA YANG BRTEN NAS, NYI MA’I DKYIL ‘KHOR DANG BYAD BZHIN LA YOD PA’I KHYAD PAR RNAMS NYI MA GZAS BZUNG BA LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI TSE, MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR LA,

And so moreover let’s consider the following example.  You can see a reflection of something, and based on that you can observe certain features that are present in the disk of the sun, and in the form being reflected.  That is, when there is an eclipse of that sun or something else of the like, you can watch it.


[3664]
NYI MA DANG BYAD BZHIN DANG DE DAG GI GZUGS BRNYAN GNYIS RNAM PAR PHRAD PA DANG MA PHRAD PAR SKYE ZHES BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I TSUL GYIS DPYAD PA NA SKYE BA MI RIGS MOD KYI, ‘ON KYANG NYI MA DANG BYAD BZHIN LA BRTEN NAS THA SNYAD KYI DBANG GIS BZHAG PA TZAM GYIS GZUGS BRNYAN ZHIG ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

And now suppose we undertake an examination in that same way where we search out what it was that got the label: we are looking to see whether the sun, and what it is which is reflected, either do make actual contact with their two reflections, or not.  As a result we admittedly find that the starting here is not right; but it is true that—based on the sun and the original image which was reflected—we can say that something, a reflection, did occur, even if we are only speaking about something established nominally.


[3665]
DES KYANG ‘DOD PA’I DON NGES PA DANG GZUGS BRNYAN MI BDEN BZHIN DU’ANG, RANG GI BYAD BZHIN MDZES PAR BSGRUB PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, GZUGS BRNYAN DE LA NI NUS PA YOD PA

Now the ascertainment of the object that we seek—and the reflection—may not be the real things; but still they help us to establish the beauty of the original object being reflected.  As such, we can say that it—the reflection—does possess some force.


[3666]
JI LTA BA DE BZHIN DU, ‘DIR YANG GDONG PA DANG ‘DRA BA’I SHES RAB KYI DRI MA MA RIG PA SBYANG BAR BYA BA LA, NUS PA MTHONG BAR ‘GYUR BA’I GTAN TSIGS RTEN ‘BREL DANG GCIG DU BRAL SOGS LAS BSGRUB BYA RANG BZHIN GYIS MED PA RTOGS PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Here, in the same way as with that other case, we seek to clean the impurity of misunderstanding away from wisdom, which is similar to a person’s face.  And we should understand that we come to a realization that things do not exist through any nature of their own: which is the thesis that we are undertaking to establish with classical proofs such as that based on interdependence, and the lack of one or many.  For these are reasonings that we can see have the force to remove that impurity marring the face.


[3667]
DE YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PAR SGRUB PA’I ‘THAD PA DANG BRAL BA’I GTAN TSIGS SO,,

These can also be referred to as types of reasoning which are “devoid of any correctness,” in the sense of it being correct to establish things as existing through some nature of their own.


[3668]
KYANG GI SGRAS [f. 247a] NI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I ‘THAD PA DANG BRAL BA’I SUN ‘BYIN GYIS KYANG SUN DBYUNG BYA SUN ‘BYIN NUS PA’I SHES PAR BYA’O,,

When the root text says “too” here, we should understand it as referring to the force that an attack possesses to successfully attack what it attacks, in the absence of any correctness to the idea that things could exist through any nature of their own.


[3669]
GANG GI PHYIR MING TZAM PA’I BTAGS YOD DU SMRA BA RNAMS LA, BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I GNYIS SU SMRA BA MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR, GNYIS LA BRTEN NAS SUN ‘BYIN PA DANG LAN SMRA BAS DBU MA PA LA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU GLAGS MI RNYED DE,

The rationale here is that it would be illogical for those who assert that things exist in name only—only labeled—to say that they had gone on a search for the thing that got the label, and found it in either two of the places.  Which is to say, there’s no way you can come out on top against those of the Middle Way school if you use an attack or give a response that depends on either one of those two options.


[3670]
BRGYA BA LAS,
,YOD DANG MED DANG YOD MED CES,
,GANG LA PHYOGS NI YOD MIN PA,
,DE LA YUN NI RING PO NA’ANG,
,KLAN KA BRJOD PAR NUS MA YIN,
ZHES BYA BA DANG,

The Four Hundred Verses puts it this way—

	There are some
	Who have no position
	At all,

	Saying that things exist,
	Or don’t exist,
	Or both exist and don’t.

	These are not people
	That you can sustain
	An argument with
	For very long!


[3671]
RTZA SHE LAS KYANG,
,STONG PA NYID KYIS BRTZAD BYAS TSE,
,GANG ZHIG LAN ‘DEBS SMRA BYED PA,
,DE YIS THAMS CAD LAN BTAB MIN,
,BSGRUB PAR BYA DANG MTSUNGS PAR ‘GYUR,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

Wisdom says as well:

When you examine things
With emptiness,

You find that those
Who try to give an answer
Have given none at all;

And it’s the same
With attempting a proof.


[3672]
SUN ‘BYIN BYED DANG SUN DBYUNG BYA LA PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI DPYAD PA BSTAN PA ‘DIS NI, SKYED PAR BYED PA’I RGYU LA YANG ‘BRAS BU DANG PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI DPYAD PA BYAS NAS ‘GOG PAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

This section—where we present an examination of whether what does the attacking and what is attacked ever make contact with each other or not—should be understood as a  refutation as well which employs examining whether or not the cause that acts to trigger something ever makes contact with its result.


[3673]
‘DIR LEGS LDAN GYIS DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS ‘DIR SKYED BYED KYI RGYU’I SKABS SU BAB KYI, GSAL BYED KYI RGYU LA NI MA YIN LA, PHRAD PA DANG MA PHRAD PA’I DPYAD PA YANG GSAL BYED KYI RGYU LA YIN GYI SKYED BYED KYI RGYU LA NI MIN PAS, KHO BO CAG GI TSIG RNAMS LA LTAG GCOD KYI GNAS MED PA NYID DO,

At this juncture, Master Bhavaviveka would make the following reply.  He would say that all this relates to the section in the classical commentary on the middle way where we discuss causes that act to trigger something; but—

…it is not a reference to the section where we talk about causes that act to clarify an idea.  And the examination of whether contact is made or not is something that relates to causes which clarify an idea, and not to causes which trigger something.  As such, our words are not something which would allow any opportunity at all for a final determination.


[3674]
ZHES SKYED BYED KYI RGYU LA GSAL BYED DAM SHES BYED KYI RGYU GTAN TSIGS SOGS LA PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI DPYAD PA BYED PA’I DPYAD PA BYAR MED DO ZHES SMRA BA NI LAN MA YIN TE,

Which is to say, this is not a reply in which we are saying that “There is nothing here which is examined by what is doing the examination, so far as the question of contact or no contact with reasoning which clarifies something, or informs of something, relating to a cause which acts to trigger some other thing.”


[3675]
GZHAN GYI GLAGS DANG BCAS PA STE SKYON BRJOD [f. 247b] DANG BCAS PA’I LAN BRJOD NA, PHA ROL PO MI BZOD LA SKYED PAR BYED PA LA BDEN PA KHAS BLANGS NA SKYON ‘JUG PA LTAR, GSAL BYED KYI RGYU LA’ANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHAS BLANGS NA SKYON YOD PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And so suppose we were to give a reply with an “opening”; which is to say, where the other person could point out some logical fault.  We know that certain problems would arise with accepting the idea that something which acted to trigger something else was real; just so, there would be problems with agreeing that a cause which acted to clarify some idea could exist through some nature of its own.


[3676]
GZHAN YANG LEGS LDAN ‘DIS DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS SU RANG BZHIN MED PAR DAM BCAS PA’I DON SGRUB PA’I PHYIR DU BKOD BA’I SGRUB BYED LA, GZHAN GYIS SUN ‘BYIN PA BKOD PA RNAMS KYI SKYON SPONG LA LTAG GCOD KYI LAN SMRA BAR BYED PAS,

Moreover, we can consider certain proofs that this same Master Bhavaviveka puts forth to establish the assertions, made in the classical commentary on the middle way, that things have no nature of their own.  Here he does undertake to give definitive responses which serve to deny the problems that are raised by others in their attacks on this position.


[3677]
‘DI NI GZHAN GYIS SUN DBYUNG BAR BYA BA KHO NA YIN PAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHAS BLANGS NA, SKYED BYED DANG GSAL BYED KYI RGYU GNYIS KA LA PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI SKYON MTSUNGS KYANG, DE KHAS MI LEN PA’I PHYIR SKYON MED DO ZHES PA KHO BO CAG GIS BTAB PA’I LAN KHO NA CHES MDZES SO,,

And so suppose we say that if something is only an idea that others seek to attack, we would assert that it existed through some nature of its own.  The problems that arise with contact being made or not being made are equivalent, whether we’re talking about causes that act to trigger something, or those which act to clarify something.  Nonetheless, what we can do is to respond, “Well, since we accept no such thing, then we have no problem.”  For us to do no more than make this kind of reply is perfectly elegant.



Why our position
is not equivalent

[3678]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to that second point from before: a clear explanation of the reason why our position is not equivalent to the statement of a necessary implication for the other party.


	[3679]
[VI.176]
Prāptyādiyuktyupanayo hi bhaved yadi syād
dhetuḥ svasādhyagamakaḥ khalu vastu siddhaḥ,
Sādhya svarūpam api vastuta eva gamyam
etac ca nāsti tava kevalam eva khedaḥ.

,GAL TE RANG GI BSGRUB BYA GO BYED
GTAN TSIGS DNGOS GRUB DANG,
,DNGOS SU GO BYA NYID ‘GYUR BSGRUB BYA’I
NGO BO’ANG YOD GYUR NA,
,PHRAD PA LA SOGS RIGS PA NYE BAR
SBYOR BAR ‘GYUR ZHIG NA,
,DE YANG YOD PA MIN PAS KHYED KYI
YI CHAD ‘BA’ ZHIG YIN,

		Suppose then
		It were the case
		That this entity
		Of what we refer to
		As a logical statement

		Meant to help others
		Comprehend what
		We are trying to prove—

		Along with the
		Essential nature of what
		We are trying to prove,

		That exact thing
		Which we hope will be
		Directly understood—
		Could exist.

		And suppose that
		We put together reasoning
		That they did make contact,
		Or anything of the like.

		This is further
		Something that
		Could never exist;

		As such,
For you it is just
		Some exhausting
		Expenditure of effort.


[3680]
GAL TE RANG GI BSGRUB BYA GO BYED GTAN TSIGS KYI DNGOS PO STE NGO BO DANG, DNGOS SU GO BAR BYA BA NYID DU ‘GYUR BA BSGRUB BYA’I NGO BO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YOD PAR GYUR NA,

And so suppose then it were the case that this entity or essential nature of what we refer to as a logical statement meant to help others comprehend what we are trying to prove—along with the essential nature of what we are trying to prove, that exact thing which we hope will be directly understood—could exist in a way where they existed through some nature of their own.


[3681]
BSGRUB BYA DANG SGRUB BYED PHRAD PA DANG, LA SOGS PAS MA PHRAD PAR SGRUB PA DANG SUN ‘BYIN PA’I RIGS PA NYE BAR SBYOR BAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG NA,

And suppose then that we were to put together reasoning which was meant either to prove, or to attack, the idea that what was being proved and what did the proving did make contact, or “anything of the like”—referring to not making contact.


[3682]
RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DE YANG YOD PA MIN PAS MA DAG PA’I PHYOGS LA BKOD PA’I SKYON, DAG PA’I PHYOGS LA KHYED KYIS BKOD PA ‘DI NI KHO BO CAG LA DON MED PAR YI CHAD PA STE YID ‘BYUNG BA ‘BA’ ZHIG YIN PAR RTOGS TE,

But the fact is further that the very fact of something existing through some nature of its own is something that could never exist; as such, we should understand that for those of you who are on the completely correct side of things to point out problems with those who are already on the completely incorrect side of things is just some kind of exhausting or hopeless expenditure of effort for all of us.


[3683]
DPER NA RAB RIB CAN GYIS DMIGS PA’I SKRA SHAD LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI GCIG NYID DANG, MANG PO NYID DANG, ZLUM PO NYID DANG, NAG PO LA SOGS PA’I PHYOGS SUN [f. 248a] ‘BYIN PAS,

Suppose, for example, that we worked very hard to attack the idea—held by individuals who have cataracts on their eyes—that the strands of hair that they were seeing were either just one alone, or some great number, or somehow rounded, or black, or anything else of the like.  


[3684]
RAB RIB MED PA RNAMS LA MI GNOD PA DE BZHIN DU, RANG BZHIN MED PA’I RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU RNAM PAR DPYOD PA NA, KHYOD KYIS BTAGS DON ‘TSOL BA’I GNYIS KYI DPYAD PA BZUNG NAS SUN ‘BYIN PA BKOD PAS KYANG MI GNOD DO,,

The fact is that this would do nothing to dissuade the people with the cataracts.  Neither is it the case that it would dissuade the individuals here in this case, if you set forward an attack in which you undertook an examination of cause & effect which in fact had no nature of its own, to check it in both the approaches for searching out what is given the label.


[3685]
DE NYID KYI PHYIR GANG DAG MIG DANG KHAB LONG LA SOGS PAS MA PHRAD PAR RANG GI BYA BA BYED PAR RNAM PAR BZHAG PA’I DPE DE DAG KYANG BKAG PAR RIG PAR BYA STE, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR KHAS LEN NA DE DAG LA YANG PHRAD MA PHRAD KYI THAL BA MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

For this reason, let’s look at these examples where we use things like the eye or a magnet to describe how something can be established as performing its function even in the absence of contact.  It would be logical then to deny these examples, since if we accept that a thing can exist through some nature of its own, the consequences of saying that it either made contact or did not make contact would be the same.


[3686]
GANG ZHIG KHYOD RANG BZHIN MED PA NYID KYI LAM DRANG PO BTANG NAS, RTOG GE NGAN PA’I LAM SHIN TU ‘KHYOG PA, RANG GI RNAM PAR RTOG PA’I BZO NGAN PAS SBYAR BA, YANG DAG PA’I LAM ‘GEGS PAR BYED PA LA SPRO BA, TE BOR TE SHIN TU TSOGS {%TSEGS} CHE BA ‘DIS KHYOD LA CI ZHIG BYA,

And so here you are, abandoning the straight path of the idea that things have no nature of their own.  And instead you turn to a very crooked path of poor logic—one which is nothing but a defective creation of your own imagining.  You delight in something that serves to create an obstacle for the true path, and discard this way.  In fact, you go to great pains in this entire endeavor of yours.  But what good will it ever do you?



Beyond any denial

[3687]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third point from above: a demonstration of how—so long as we are able to establish that things have no nature of their own—the other party will be unable to prove any denial of our position.


	[3688]
[VI.177]
Nirvastukā gamayituṃ sakalāḥ padārthāḥ
śakyā yathātisukaraṃ na tathā svabhāvaḥ,
Śaktaḥ sukhena khalu bodhayituṃ pareṣāṃ
lokaṃ kim aṅga lapasīha kutarka jālam.

,DNGOS RNAMS MTHA’ DAG DNGOS PO MED PAR
RTOGS SU GZHUG PAR NI,
,NUS PAR CHES SLA JI LTA DE LTAR
RANG BZHIN GZHAN DAG LA,
,KHONG DU CHUD PAR BDE BLAG TU NI
NUS PA MA YIN NO,
,RTOG GE NGAN PA’I DRA BAS ‘JIG RTEN
CI STE ‘DIR RTZOL BYED,

		They are extremely
		Simple ways that have
		The capacity to help people

		Come to the realization
		That all existing entities
		Are those things:
		That do not exist.

		It is not the case though
		That, in the same way,

		Those others would be
		Enabled with ease
		To comprehend the nature.

		What on earth
		Are you doing,

		Expending such
		Devoted efforts towards
		Those of this world,

		With your widespreading
		Net of bad logic?


[3689]
GZHAN YANG JI LTAR SGYU MA DANG RMI LAM LA SOGS PA PHYIR RGOL RANG GI PHYOGS LA’ANG GRUB PA’I DPE KHO NAS, PHYIR RGOL GYI ‘JIG RTEN GYIS DNGOS PO RNAMS MTHA’ DAG DBU MA PAS DNGOS PO STE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAR RTOGS SU GZHUG PAR NUS PA NI, CHES SLA BA JI LTA BA

Moreover, things like an illusion and a dream are nothing less than examples that can be accepted in the system of the person we are debating with.  They are extremely simple ways that have the capacity to help these people on the other side—people of the normal world—come to the realization that all existing entitites are, as those of the middle way describe it, “those things,” meaning things that do not exist with any nature of their own.


[3690]
DE LTAR PHA ROL PO LAS GZHAN DBU MA PA DAG LA DNGOS PO RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAR KHONG DU CHUD PAR BDE BLAG TU NI NUS PA MA YIN TE, GNYIS KA LA BDEN PAR GRAGS PA’I DPE MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

It is not the case though that, in the same way, those other than the opponent here—meaning those who follow the middle way—would be enabled with this ease to comprehend that entities did exist through some nature of their own.  And that’s because there is no example that would be said to be true inside of both camps.


[3691]
‘DIS NI BDEN MED SGRUB PA’I GTAN TSIGS RTEN ‘BREL LTA BU LA, BDEN MED KYIS KHYAB PA MTHUN DPE’I STENG DU MA NGES PAR BDEN MED CHOS CAN GYI STENG DU TSAD [f. 248b] MAS NGES PAR BYAR MED PAR GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that—with something like the concept of dependence, used as a rationale for proving that nothing exists in reality—there is no way that we can conclude, with an accurate perception, that the quality of not existing in reality applies to the subject under consideration, unless we have first confirmed—with reference to a concordant example—that if something is dependent it cannot exist in reality.


[3692]
DE LTA NA KHO BOS DNGOS POR SMRA BA’I RTZOD PA THAMS CAD BZLOG PA YIN LA, CHOS MTHUN GYI LAN YANG SUS KYANG BRJOD PAR MI NUS SO,,

And so it is that we are able to put a stop to all the arguments proposed by the Functionalists; the fact is that no one could ever offer a truly relevant response.


[3693]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN LA DON MA YIN PA’I GNOD PA BYA BA’I PHYIR, ‘DIR KHYOD SU ZHIG GIS BCOL {%every source spells this way, not btzol} BA STE SBAD CING, KHYOD ‘JIG RTEN PA RNAMS RANG GI NYON MONGS DAR GYI SRIN BU LTAR RANG GI RNAM RTOG NGAN PA’I SBUBS KYIS GTUMS PA’I

As such, why is it that here any of you would expend such devoted efforts—why would you try so hard—to cause meaningless trouble for these people of the world?  People around us in this world are already wrapped deep in the cocoon of their own disastrous ways of thinking—a cocoon woven with the silken threads of their own negative emotions.


[3694]
STENG DU, RTOG GE NGAN PA’I SRAD BU BRES PA’I DRA BAS TE RGYA SHIN TU SRAN TE MA KUN NAS {%both texts read this} ‘DZUGS PAR CI STE BYED,

And now on top of that, you are smothering them ever more firmly in a massive, additional net of widespreading strands of bad logic.  What on earth are you doing?


[3695]
BDEN ‘DZIN GYI RTZOD PA ‘DI NI DOR BAR BYA DGOS TE, DNGOS PO GZUGS BRNYAN DANG ‘DRA BA’I BRDZUN PA THAMS CAD LA, RANG DANG SPYI’I MTSAN NYID DANG MNGON SUM MAM RJES SU DPAG PA’AM RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA CI ZHIG YOD,,

This argument where you grasp onto things as being real is something that now you really have to give up.  Things are all fake, just like a reflection in a mirror.  How then are you going to prove somehow that they exist through some nature of their own; that they possess some particular or more general characteristics of their own, which could be detected either through our direct senses, or through some kind of deduction?


[3696]
‘DIR NI SHES BYA THAMS CAD LA MNGON SUM GCIG KHO NAR ZAD DE GANG THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES SO,,

Here we are saying that there is one—and only one—form of direct, accurate perception towards each and every knowable object in existence.  And that is the wisdom of an Omniscient Being.



Additional attacks

[3697]
BZHI PA NI,

This then takes us to our fourth point from above, which is showing how we can understand additional attacks that have not been explained here so far.


	[3698]
[VI.178]
Śeṣaṃ ca dūṣaṇam avetya puropadiṣṭaṃ
prāptyādi pakṣa parihāra kṛte’tra dehi,
Vaitaṇḍikatvam api nāsti yathā tathoktaṃ
prāg eva śeṣam avagaccha diśānayaiva.

,SUN ‘BYIN LHAG MA GONG DU BSTAN PA
YANG NI SHES BYAS NAS,
,PHRAD PA LA SOGS PHYOGS KYI LAN GYI
CHED DU ‘DIR GTANG BYA,
,SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA PO YANG
JI LTAR YOD MIN PA,
,DE SKAD SNGAR BSHAD LHAG MA PHYOGS ‘DI
NYID KYIS RTOGS PAR BYA,

		We utilize what we learned
		In those earlier presentations,
		Those points additional
		To our attack.

		We sought to give
		A response to express
		The position about

		Contact or anything
		Of the like; so here,
		We engaged in
		Our own attack.

		There does not exist one
With further argument.

The remainder
Already described
In these words

Can be understood
From this very position.		


[3699]
SA BON LA BRTEN NAS MYU GU SKYE BA LTA BU’I RTEN CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA DANG, PHUNG PO LA BRTEN NAS GANG ZAG GDAGS PA LTA BU’I BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA RNAM PAR GZHAG PAR

And so we have been through sections here where we explained how things like the growing of a sprout occur in a dependent relationship; we gave as well a description of how things are labeled in dependence, as for example in the case of labeling a person depending upon the parts to the person.


[3700]
BYA BA’I SKABS SU, DNGOS POR SMRA BA’I PHYOGS LA SUN ‘BYIN GANG BSHAD PA DE NYID KYI LHAG MA RGYUS ‘BRAS BU PHRAD NAS SAM, MA PHRAD PAR SKYED CES SUN ‘BYIN PA

During these presentations, we covered a number of points that were additional to our attack upon the positions of the Functionalists.  We presented for example an attack upon the idea that a cause could produce a result either through making contact with it, or in an absence of such contact.  


[3701]
GONG DU BSTAN PA YANG NI SHES PAR BYAS NAS, RGYUS ‘BRAS BU PHRAD NAS SAM LA SOGS PAS MA PHRAD PAR SKYED CES BRTAGS TE BKAG PA’I PHYOGS KYI LAN BRJOD PA’I CHED DU,

And then utilizing what we had learned in those earlier presentations, we examined responses that were given by the other side as they examined this question of whether a cause acts to trigger a result through making contact with it, or “anything of the like”—here referring to not making contact with it.  With that, we sought to give a response to express the position that we denied these possibilities.


[3702]
PHA ROL POS SUN ‘BYIN LA PHRAD [f. 249a] MA PHRAD KYI BRTAG PA GANG GIS SMRAS PA DE LA RTZOD PA’I SKABS ‘DIR, DE’I BRTAG PA RANG LA MI MTSUNGS PA’I LAN GYI SUN ‘BYIN PA GTANG BAR BYA STE, SNGAR BSTAN PA DE NI MTSON PA TZAM DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Which has brought us here to this point where we are debating with positions expressed by the other side wherein they undertook an examination of whether, in a logical attack, contact is made or not.  And then we engaged in our own attack, where we responded that this particular examination did not apply equally to ourselves.  You should understand that all of these points up to here are meant only to offer a representative sample of the issues and their resolution.


[3703]
BSTAN BCOS RTZA SHE LAS NI DGAG GZHAG BYAS PA’I DGOS PA, BDEN ‘DZIN GYI RNAM RTOG LDOG PA NYID BRJOD PAR ‘DOD PA YIN LA,

Now the points of denying others’ positions and establishing then our own, as they are found in the classical commentary entitled Wisdom, are all intended to accomplish one thing: to stop the wrong idea where we hold things to exist in some real way.


[3704]
DE YANG KHO BO CAG GIS SO SO SKYE BO RNAMS NI RTOG PAS BCINGS, ZHES SOGS KYI SKABS SU BSTAN ZIN PA’I PHYIR, BSTAN BCOS LA SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA GA LA YOD DE, SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA NI RANG GI PHYOGS BZHAG NA SKYON BYUNG GIS DOGS NAS, GZHAN GYI PHYOGS SUN CI PHYIN BYED PA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Now we for our part have already presented the necessary point in the root text earlier on, where it says “Common beings are enslaved by notions.”  As such, we don’t see how one could ever have any further argument attacking the ideas of the classical commentary; that is, any argument in attack would result from setting forth our own position, and then questions coming up about whether there were any problems with it.  This is the only kind of argument against others that would be made at this point. 


[3705]
‘DIR BDAG GIS GZHAN GYI PHYOGS BSAL BA YANG DON DAM PAR MED DE, DON DAM PAR DNGOS PO GANG YANG MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

When we ourselves here disprove the position of the other side, it is not as though it exists in any ultimate way.  That’s because—from an ultimate point of view—there doesn’t even exist any entity at all.


[3706]
DE’I PHYIR SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA GA LA YOD, GANG GIS NA RANG GI PHYOGS GZHAG TU MED CING GZHAN GYI PHYOGS BZLOG PA DON DAM PAR ‘DOD PA’I MTSAN NYID BYAS PA ‘DI, SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA PA’I YANG DAG PA’I MTSAN NYID DU ‘GYUR BA,

How then could there ever be an opponent that we overcame?  Suppose that there were no position of our own that we could ever put forward, but that at the same time we posited some definitive statement that could put a stop to the other side’s position.  This would in itself require a definitive opponent—one that existed really, in order for us to overcome.


[3707]
DBU MA PA SUS RANG GI PHYOGS THA SNYAD DU MA BZHAG CING, GZHAN GYI PHYOGS BZLOG PA DON DAM DU ‘DOD PA GNYIS KA MED PAS, DBU MA PA LA SUN CI PHYIN DU RGOL BA YANG YOD PA MIN PAS, RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU MI RIGS SO,,

But neither of these things exists: there is no adherent of the middle way that would not want to put forth their own position only in a nominal manner; or who would want to disprove the other side’s position in some ultimate manner.  As such, there does not even exist a debater who could undertake to overthrow those of the middle way; and for this reason the entire exercise would be futile.


[3708]
DE SKAD DE DE LTAR SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SUN ‘BYIN PA’I LHAG MA NI, DE MA THAG TU BSHAD PA’I PHYOGS ‘DI NYID KYIS RTOGS PAR BYA’O,,

The remainder of the attack already described in these words, in this way, can be understood from “this very position”—meaning the one that will be presented directly below.


[3709]
DE LA DE NYID DE LAS ‘BYUNG MIN ZHES BYA BA ‘DI NAS [f. 249b] BRTZAMS TE, RNAM DPYOD PA NI MYUR DU GROL BAR ‘GYUR, ZHES BYA BA’I BAR ‘DIS NI CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA GSAL BAR BYAS SO,,

And so we have this major portion of the root text beginning from “This cannot occur through that” [verse VI.8a] on up to “When we are able to analyze things, we find ourselves liberated, with speed” [verse VI.119].  All of this has been a clear explanation of how general things lack any self-nature.


[3710]
NYON MONGS SKYON RNAMS MA LUS ‘JIG TSOGS LA, ,LTA LAS BYUNG BAR ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA NAS ‘DI YAN CHAD KYIS NI GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED PA GSAL BAR BYAS SO,,

And then we get a clear explanation of how the person lacks any self-nature starting from lines such as those that say, “Each & every one of the troubles of the negative emotions comes from the view of destruction” [verse VI.120].



Divisions of emptiness in brief

[3711]
GSUM PA LA GNYIS, STONG PA NYID KYI DBYE BA MDOR BSTAN PA, PHYE BA SO SO’I DON RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our third very general section from above—an explanation of the divisions of emptiness we have thus confirmed.  We proceed in two steps here: a brief presentation of the divisions of emptiness, and then a more detailed explanation of what each division involves.  Here is the first.


	[3712]
[VI.179]
Nairātmyam etad dvividhaṃ niruktaṃ
dharmātma bhedena jagad vimukteḥ,
Tad eva bhitvā bahuśo’pi bhūyas
tathā vineyebhya uvāca śāstā.

,BDAG MED ‘DI NI ‘GRO BA RNAMS DGROL PHYIR,
,CHOS DANG GANG ZAG DBYE BA RNAM GNYIS GSUNGS,
,DE LTAR STON PAS SLAR YANG ‘DI NYID NI,
,GDUL BYA RNAMS LA PHYE STE RNAM MANG GSUNGS,

	In order to free beings,
He stated that
	There are no objects

	Which possess
	Some self-nature;

	And that this
	Has two divisions:
	
	That to the person,
	And that to things.

	Having taught as such,
He went on to
Lay out all the
Different divisions

Of this very thing,
For different disciples.


[VI.180]
Śūnyatāḥ ṣoḍaśākhyāya saprapañcāḥ samāsataḥ,
Catasraḥ punar ākhyātā mahāyāne ca tā matāḥ

,SPROS DANG BCAS PAR STONG PA NYID,
,BCU DRUG BSHAD NAS MDOR BSDUS TE,
,SLAR YANG BZHIR BSHAD DE DAG NI,
,THEG CHEN DU YANG BZHED PA YIN,

	He utilized
	Great detail,

	First explaining
	Sixteen divisions
	Of emptiness,

	And then he
	Went over the same
	In a briefer way,
	With four types.

	And he acknowledged
	As well that
These constituted
The greater way.


[3713]
STONG PA NYID KYI RAB TU DBYE BA BRJOD PAR ‘DOD NAS BSHAD PA,

Desirous of expressing the divisions to emptiness, our author undertakes the following explanation.


[3714]
CHOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA’I BDAG MED ‘DI NI, ,BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED PA DANG, CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA’I DBYE BA RNAM PA GNYIS SU GSUNGS SO,,

Let’s consider then this fact that there are no objects in the entire universe which possess some self-nature: which exist through any nature of their own.  The Conqueror has stated that it has two great divisions: the lack of a self-nature to the person, and the lack of a self-nature to things.


[3715]
DE GNYIS SU ‘BYED TSUL DE YANG GZHI GANG ZAG DANG CHOS KYI STENG DU MED RGYU’I BDAG MI ‘DRA BA GNYIS KYI SGO NAS PHYE BA MIN TE, MED RGYU’I BDAG NI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YIN PAS SO,,

It is not the case that the way in which we make this division into two is based upon two different types of a self which does not exist, starting off from the division of things into the person and things.  That’s because the self that is not there is one which exists through its own nature.


[3716]
DE’I PHYIR GZHI CHOS CAN PHUNG SOGS KYI CHOS DANG GANG ZAG GI DBYE BAS PHYE BA’O,,

As such, the division is made according to a basis of the division consisting of objects which possess a certain quality: things in the sense of the parts to the person and such, and then the person.


[3717]
DGOS PA CI’I PHYIR DE GNYIS BSTAN ZHE NA, GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED NI NYAN RANG GI ‘GRO BA RNAMS ‘KHOR BA LAS RNAM PAR GROL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR BSTAN LA, BYANG SEMS KYI ‘GRO BA RNAMS THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA THOB PAS RNAM PAR GROL BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR BDAG MED GNYIS KA BSTAN NO,,

“What is the purpose,” one may ask, “of presenting these two types?”  The lack of a self-nature to the person was taught in order to free beings who were listeners and self-made buddhas from the cycle of suffering.  And both kinds of the lack of a self-nature were taught in order to free those beings who are bodhisattvas—which is what happens when they attain the state of omniscience.


[3718]
SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR NYAN RANG LA YANG RTEN ‘BREL RKYEN NYID ‘DI PA TZAM GYI DE KHO NA NYID MTHONG BA YOD MOD KYANG, DE DAG LA SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR GYI CHOS KYI BDAG MED PA RNAM GRANGS DANG, DUS KYI SGO NAS YONGS SU RDZOGS PAR SGOM PA MED PA STE, ‘ON KYANG KHAMS GSUM GYI NYON MONGS KYI SA BON [f. 250a] SPONG BA’I THABS TZAM ZHIG NI YOD DO,,

As we explained earlier on, it is possible for listeners and self-made buddhas also to see suchness relating to this fact of causality: of dependence.  But as we also explained earlier, these groups are incapable of meditating upon the lack of a self-nature to things in the entirety of the different expressions it takes, and relative to different times.  We can say though that these practitioners do have in their possession just that method which allows them to eliminate the seeds for negative emotions relating to all three realms of the universe.


[3719]
DE DAG LA GANG ZAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED PA MA LUS PAR SGOM PA NI YOD PAR RNAM PAR GZHAG GO

We do make a presentation which shows that these individuals do possess a practice where they meditate upon all the forms of the lack of a self-nature to the person—of a person who could exist through some nature of their own.


[3720]
,GANG ZAG BDEN GRUB ‘GOG PA’I RIGS PA’I RNAM GRANGS MTHA’ YAS PA’I SHES RAB MI SKYED KYANG, NYON MONGS KYI SA BON GYI GNYEN PO RDZOGS PAR SGOM PA YOD LA, SHES BYA’I SGRIB PA’I GNYEN PO RDZOGS PAR SGOM PA NI MED DO,,

It is not the case that these individuals are able to give rise to that wisdom where we used literally countless forms of reasoning to block the idea that the person could exist in some real way.  Nonetheless, they do possess a practice where they are able to meditate, in full, upon the antidotes for the seeds of the negative emotions.  At the same time, they do not possess a practice where they can meditate, in a complete way, upon the the antidotes to the obstacles to omniscience.


[3721]
DE LTAR BDAG MED PA GNYIS PO ‘DI NYID NI BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS SLAR YANG GDUL BAR BYA BA RNAMS LA DE DAG GI BSAM PA SNA TSOGS PA’I NGOR RNAM PA MANG PO’I SPROS PA DANG BCAS PAR PHYE STE GSUNGS SO,,

As such, the Conqueror went on to lay out all the different divisions of this very thing—the two different types of a lack of any self-nature—utilizing great detail, for the benefit of different disciples, according to their various states of mind.


[3722]
JI LTAR ZHE NA, RGYAL BA’I YUM LAS STONG PA NYID BCU DRUG GI DBYE BA BSHAD NAS, SLAR YANG MDOR BSDUS TE BZHIR BZHAG CING DE DAG NI THEG CHEN DU YANG BZHED PA STE BSHAD PA YIN NO,,

And how did he do so?  In his Mother of the Victors, he first explained the concept of emptiness in its sixteen different divisions.  And then he went over the same material in a briefer way, making a division into four types.  And he acknowledged as well that these constituted the greater way.


[3723]
DE LTAR NA BSDUS PA’I DBYE BA GNYIS DANG, ‘BRING PO’I DBYE BA BZHI DANG, RGYAS PA’I DBYE BA BCU DRUG TU GSUNGS SO,,

As such we can say that he gave this teaching utilizing a more succinct division into two; and then an intermediate division into four; and finally an extensive division into sixteen.


[3724]
JI SKAD DU, RAB ‘BYOR GZHAN YANG BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I THEG PA CHEN PO ‘DI LTA STE, NANG STONG PA NYID DANG, PHYI STONG PA NYID DANG, PHYI NANG STONG PA NYID DANG, STONG PA NYID STONG PA NYID DANG, CHEN PO STONG PA NYID DANG, DON DAM PA STONG PA NYID DANG, ‘DUS BYAS STONG PA NYID DANG, ‘DUS MA BYAS STONG PA NYID DANG, MTHA’ LAS ‘DAS PA STONG PA NYID DANG, THOG MA DANG THA MA MED PA STONG PA NYID DANG, DOR BA MED PA STONG PA NYID DANG, RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID DANG, CHOS THAMS CAD STONG PA NYID DANG, RANG GI MTSAN NYID STONG PA NYID DANG, MI [f. 250b] DMIGS PA STONG PA NYID DANG, DNGOS PO MED PA’I NGO BO NYID STONG PA NYID DO, ZHES STONG NYID BCU DRUG BSTAN NAS,

And how did he do so?  The Conqueror taught the sixteen types of emptiness, as follows—

The way of the bodhisattva can moreover be described, o Subhuti, in this way:

(1) emptiness on the inside;

(2) emptiness on the outside;

(3) emptiness on the outside and the inside;

(4) emptiness emptiness;

(5) great emptiness;

(6) ultimate emptiness;

(7) the emptiness of produced things;

(8) the emptiness of things that exist but were not produced;

(9) the emptiness beyond all extremes;

(10) the emptiness of no beginning or end;

(11) the emptiness that can never be given up;

(12) the emptiness of any nature;

(13) the emptiness of all things;

(14) the emptiness of its own quality;

(15) the emptiness of not seeing anything; and

(16) the emptiness of true nature, beyond all things.


[3725]
RAB ‘BYOR GZHAN YANG DNGOS PO NI DNGOS POS STONG NGO, ,DNGOS PO MED PA NI DNGOS PO MED PAS STONG NGO, ,RANG BZHIN NI RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG NGO, ,GZHAN GYI DNGOS PO NI GZHAN GYI DNGOS POS STONG NGO, ZHES SLAR YANG STONG PA NYID BZHI BSTAN NO,,

And then the Conqueror went on to teach four different kinds of emptiness—

O Subhuti, there is also the fact that things are empty of being things.  And the lack of things is also empty of the lack of things.  The nature of things is empty of being the nature of things.  And other things are empty of being other things.


[3726]
STONG PA NYID ‘DI RNAMS NI THEG PA CHEN PO ZHES BYA’O,,

And these kinds of emptiness are what we refer to as the “greater way.”


[3727]
STONG PA NYID DAM STONG PA NYID MA YIN PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NI CUNG ZAD KYANG YOD PA MA YIN TE, STONG PA NYID SO SO BA’I RNAM PA DE LTA BUS ‘DUL BA KUN RDZOB TU YOD PAR BSNYAD PAR ZAD DO,,

Neither emptiness itself and everything which is not emptiness exists in the slightest way through some nature of their own.  It is nothing more than the case that we are using all these different types of emptiness as names for what functions in a deceptive manner to tame disciples.


[3728]
DE SKAD DU YANG RTZA BA SHES RAB LAS,
,GAL TE STONG MIN CUNG ZAD YOD,
,STONG PA CUNG ZAD YOD PAR ‘GYUR,
,MI SKONG {%STONG} CUNG ZANG {%ZAD} YOD MIN NA,
,STONG PA’ANG YOD PAR GA LA ‘GYUR,

Wisdom addresses the same idea in the following lines:

If there is the slightest bit
Of anything that is not empty,

Then there can be the slightest
Bit of things that are empty.

And if there were not
The slightest bit of anything
That was not empty,
	
	How could we ever say that
	There was anything empty?


	[3729]
,STONG NGO ZHES KYANG MI BRJOD DE,
,MI STONG ZHES KYANG MI BYA ZHING,
,GNYIS DANG GNYIS MIN MI BYA STE,
,GDAGS PA’I DON DU BRJOD PAR BYA,
ZHES GSUNGS TE,

	Don’t say things are empty;
	But don’t say either
	That they are not.

	Don’t go to two
	Or not being two;

	Describe them as things
	That are labelled.


[3730]
SNGA MA DAG GIS NI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I PHYOGS SU MI BRJOD PA DANG, THA MAS NI GDAGS PA’I DON KUN RDZOB TU YOD PAR BRJOD PAR BYA BA’I DON NO,,

The point of the earlier lines is that we cannot speak of a position where we say that things exist through some essential nature of their own; the point of the later lines is to convey that we should speak of things as existing deceptively—as things that are labelled.



The sixteen, beginning with
emptiness on the inside

[3731]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, STONG NYID BCU DRUG TU PHYE BA RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA DANG, STONG NYID BZHIR PHYE BA RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA’O,,

Which brings us to our second part from above—a more detailed explanation of what each division involves.  This we will cover in two topics: a detailed explanation of the division of emptiness into sixteen types, and a detailed explanation of the division of emptiness into four types.


[3732]
DANG PO LA BZHI, NANG STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA BZHI BSHAD PA DANG, CHEN PO STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA BZHI BSHAD PA DANG, MTHA’ LAS ‘DAS PA STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA BZHI BSHAD PA DANG, CHOS THAMS CAD STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA BZHI BSHAD [f. 251a] PA’O,,

The first of these has four sections of its own: an explanation of the four starting with emptiness on the inside; an explanation of the four starting with great emptiness; an explanation of the four starting with emptiness beyond all extremes; and an explanation of the four starting with the emptiness of all things.


[3733]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, NANG STONG PA NYID BSHAD PA DANG, STONG NYID LHAG MA GSUM BSHAD PA’O,,

The first one here has, in turn, two divisions: an explanation of emptiness on the inside; and an explanation of the remaining three types of emptiness here.



1) Emptiness on the inside

[3734]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, ZHAR LA RANG BZHIN KHAS LEN TSUL BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

And, finally, the first of these has two parts: the actual point, and then an incidental presentation on how we accept a nature to things.  Here is the first of these.


	[3735]
[VI.181]
Cakṣur vai cakṣuṣā śūnyam asyaiṣā prakṛtir yataḥ,
Evaṃ śrotraṃ mano jihvā ghrāṇaṃ kāyaś ca kathyate.

,GANG PHYIR DE YI RANG BZHIN DE,
,YIN PHYIR MIG NI MIG GIS STONG,
,DE BZHIN RNA BA SNA DANG LCE,
,LUS [213b] DANG YID KYIS BSNYAD PAR BYA,

	Why is it?  Because
	The nature of this
	Is that the eye
	Is empty of the eye.

	In the same way
	We also refer
	To the ear, the nose,
	The tongue, the body,
	And the thought [f. 213b].


[VI.182]
Akūṭa sthāvināśitvam upādāyāsvabhāvatā,
Yā ṣaṇṇāṃ cakṣur ādīnāṃ sā matā’dhyātma śūnyatā.

,THER ZUG GNAS PA MA YIN DANG,
,’JIG PA MA YIN NYID KYI PHYIR,
,MIG LA SOGS PA DRUG PA {%PO} YI,
,RANG BZHIN MED NYID GANG YIN PA,
,DE NI NANG STONG NYID DU ‘DOD,

		They are not things
		Which remain
		In a solid manner;

		Nor do they stop
		In this way.

		The eye and the
		Rest of the six
		
		Do not exist
		Through any nature;

		What we accept
		As being emptiness
		On the inside
		Is this fact.


[3736]
NANG GI CHOS MIG LA SOGS PA DRUG PO, RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI NANG STONG PA NYID DU ‘DOD DO,,

What we accept as being emptiness on the inside is the fact that the inner entities of the eye and the rest of the six do not exist in way where they are present through any nature of their own.


[3737]
DE YANG MIG NI MIG RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG STE, MIG DE’I RANG BZHIN NI RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA DE YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Which is to say, the eye is empty: it is not an eye that exists through any essential nature of its own.  And that’s because the nature of this eye is that it is empty of existing through any essential nature of its own.


[3738]
MIG LA BSHAD PA DE BZHIN DU RNA BA DANG SNA DANG LCE DANG LUS DANG YID KYANG BSNYAD PAR BYA’O,,

In the same way that we have explained it for the eye, we also refer to the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, and the thought.


[3739]
DE LTAR STONG PA’I RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA MIG SOGS DE RNAMS NI DON DAM PAR THER ZUG TU GNAS PA MA YIN PA DANG, ‘JIG PA MIN PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO,,

For what reason—why is it—that these things are empty?  The answer is for the very reason that they are not things which remain in a solid or ultimate manner; nor do they stop in this way.


[3740]
‘DIR PA TSAB KYIS THER ZUG TU GNAS PA MIN PA NI RANG BZHIN MI ‘DOR BA LA BYA’O, ,DE YANG DUS CUNG ZHIG GNAS NAS LDOG PAR YANG ‘GYUR BAS ‘JIG PA MA YIN PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO, ZHES GSUNGS SO, ,’DI SKAD BSTAN PAR ‘GYUR TE DNGOS PO GANG ZHIG RANG BZHIN DANG BCAS PA DE NYID NI, GOR MA CHAG PAR THER ZUG PA MA YIN PA DANG MI LDOG PA ZHIG TU ‘GYUR DGOS SO, ZHES BSGYUR BA NI

Here the translation of the autocommentary by Patsab reads:

What’s being said here is that “Not being something that remains in a solid way refers to being something which never releases its nature.  Which is to say, they tend to stay for the briefest amount of time, and then come to a stop; as such, they are quite certainly not things that are destroyed.”  What this means is that if something were a functioning thing and did indeed come with its own nature, then beyond a shadow of a doubt it would be something which was not solid, and which never came to a stop.


[3741]
‘GYUR ‘PHYUGS PA YIN TE, DE LTA YIN NA BSGRUB BYA’I CHOS LOG PA LA RTAGS KYIS KHYAB DGOS PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

This is in fact an error in the translation, since if this were the case then what was given as the reason would have to subsume the opposite of the quality to be proven.


[3742]
DES NA NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, DNGOS PO GANG ZHIG RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS YOD PA DE NI THER ZUG TU GNAS PA’AM, NYAMS PAR ‘GYUR BA ZHIG TU ‘GYUR RO ZHES BSGYUR BA LTAR LEGS PAS, SNGA MA NI DGAG SGRA ‘DON [f. 251b] LUGS ‘PHYUGS PAR GSAL LO,,

As such, we can say that the translation by Naktso is correct here, where it says “When something is, first of all, a functioning entity, and also exists through some essential nature of its own, then it would have to be something that remained in a solid way—or as something that never declined.”  It is clear that the previous version we’ve listed has made an error in the way it brings out the negative particle.


[3743]
‘GREL BSHAD LAS, THER ZUG GNAS PA NYID DANG NI, ,MI ‘JIG MA YIN NYID KYI PHYIR, ZHES BTON NAS MIG SOGS LA RANG BZHIN YOD NA, RANG BZHIN LA RNAM ‘GYUR DANG ‘JIG PA MED PAS, DE RNAMS LA RNAM ‘GYUR DANG ‘JIG PA MED PAR ‘GYUR BA LAS, DE YANG YOD PA MA YIN PA’I PHYIR DE RNAMS RANG BZHIN MED PA’O, ZHES ‘CHAD PA YANG RIGS PA MA YIN TE,

Now The Explanation draws our attention to “If it had an existence as something solid, and if it did not exist as something that stopped,” saying that if the eye and so on had some nature of their own, then since a real nature would never change its aspects, nor ever undergo stopping, then these could never display aspects, or come to a stop.  And then it would be illogical to continue on and say, “Since this is not the case, then these have no nature of their own.”


[3744]
DE LTA YIN NA ‘JIG PA MED PAR ‘GYUR BA LAS ‘JIG PA YOD PA’I PHYIR, ZHES BYA DGOS NA DE NI MDO LAS, ‘JIG PA MA YIN PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO ZHES GSUNGS PA DANG ‘GAL LO,,

That is, if things were this way, then one would have to declare, “If that were the case, then they would have to become things with no stopping, whereas they do have stopping.”  And then that would contradict sutra when it says, “for the very reason that they are not something with stopping.”


[3745]
THER ZUG TU GNAS PA MIN PA NYID NI, ZHES PA YANG NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, THER ZUG NI NYAMS PA MED PA’I NGO BO NYID LA BRJOD LA, ZHES BSGYUR BA LTAR BYA’O,,

As for this expression “the very fact of remaining in a solid way,” the translation should be done as we see it in Naktso’s version, where it says, “the expression ‘solid’ refers to an essential nature of never declining.”


[3746]
DE LTAR THER ZUG TU GNAS PA’I RTAG PA BKAG PA NA, MIG SOGS DE YANG RANG DUS SU CUNG ZAD GNAS NAS, DE’I ‘OG TU LDOG PA’I ‘JIG PAR BDEN NAM SNYAM PA ‘GOG PA LA ‘JIG PA MA YIN PA NYID KYI PHYIR, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And so once we have in this way blocked the idea that things could remain in some solid way, then we come to the question of “Is it real when the eye and so on remain for some small amount of time in their own space in time, and then after that reverse, and come to a stop?”  And to block this idea then it says ““for the very reason that they are not something with stopping.”


[3747]
DON BSDU NA RTAG MI RTAG GANG DU YANG MI BDEN PA’I PHYIR ZHES PA’I DON TO,,

And what this last is saying is that “In sum, then, these things are unreal, whether you are talking about their being unchanging, or changing.”


[3748]
NYI KHRI SNANG BA LAS ‘DI LAS TSUL GZHAN DU YANG GSUNGS SO,,

You can see this same point being made in the Illumination of the Twenty Thousand, from another approach.


[3749]
CHOS RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN DE YANG RTZA BA SHES RAB LAS,
,RANG BZHIN RGYU DANG RKYEN DAG LAS,
,’BYUNG BAR RIGS PA MA YIN NO,
,RGYU DANG RKYEN LAS BYUNG BA NI,
,RANG BZHIN BYAS PA CAN DU ‘GYUR,

The question of a nature to things is, moreover, treated in Wisdom as follows:

It would be illogical
To say that a nature
Derived from causes & conditions.

Anything that has come
Through causes & conditions
Has a nature that was created.


	[3750]
,RANG BZHIN BYAS PA YIN NO ZHES,
,JI LTA BUR NA RUNG BAR ‘GYUR,
,RANG BZHIN DANG NI BCOS MIN DANG,
,GZHAN LA LTOS PA [f. 252a] MED PA YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR RO,,

And how could it ever be right
To speak of a created nature?

Natures can never be artificial,
And can never rely on another.



How we do accept a nature

[3751]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: an incidental presentation on how we accept a nature to things.


[3752]
YANG CI GANG ZHIG SLOB DPON GYIS BSTAN BCOS LAS RGYU RKYEN LAS MA SKYES PA’I RANG BZHIN ZHES PA’I KHYAD PAR DU MDZAD PA DE LTA BU’I RANG BZHIN SLOB DPON GYIS ZHAL GYIS BZHES PA YOD DAM ZHE NA,

And what of the following lines?

One may pose the following question—

The Master, in his classical commentary, specifies a certain type of nature, referring to “a nature which has not been born of causes & conditions.”  Does this imply that he does accept such a nature?


[3753]
GANG GI DBANG DU MDZAD NAS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS BYUNG YANG RUNG MA BYUNG YANG RUNG, CHOS RNAMS KYI CHOS NYID ‘DI NI GNAS PA NYID DO, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I CHOS NYID CES BYA BA NI YOD DO,,

The Conqueror himself did make a certain type of reference, saying that “Whether Those Gone Thus ever make an appearance or not, the very essence of entities can only remain.”  The “very essence” mentioned here is something that does exist.


[3754]
CHOS NYID CES BYA BA ‘DI YANG CI ZHIG YIN, MIG LA SOGS PA ‘DI DAG GI RANG BZHIN NO,,

And what is this thing we call “the very essence”?  It is the nature of these things: the eye and so on.


[3755]
DE DAG GI RANG BZHIN GANG ZHIG CE NA, MIG SOGS ‘DI DAG GI BCOS MA MA YIN PA DANG, SKYED BYED GZHAN LA LTOS PA MED PA STE, MA RIG PA’I RAB RIB DANG BRAL BA’I SHES PAS RTOGS PAR BYA BA’I NGO BO ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And what is their nature?  It is the fact that these things—the eye and so forth—are in no way artificial; and that they are not things which rely upon other things to trigger them.  It is that essential nature which is perceived by those who are free of the cataracts of misunderstanding.


[3756]
‘DI DAG GIS NI SLOB DPON ‘DIS DON DAM BDEN PA DANG CHOS NYID YOD PAR MI BZHED CES PA DANG, MA RIG PA’I BSLAD PA LOG NA SHES PA YE MED PAR SMRA BA RNAMS LEGS PAR BKAG PA YIN NO,,

These lines serve as a perfect denial of those who say that this Master does not accept an ultimate reality; or a real way of things—as well as those who claim that, if we can put a stop to the influence of misunderstanding, then we have no remaining awareness at all.


[3757]
JI STE CHOS NYID DE YOD DAM, DE MED CES SU SMRA, GAL TE DE MED NA NI BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS CI’I DON DU PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I LAM SGOM PAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR TE,

And so do we say that this essential nature to things exists, or does not?  If it didn’t exist, then for what purpose would the bodhisattvas practice the path of the perfections?  There would be no point at all.


[3758]
DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA MED NA NI DE RTOGS PA MTHAR THUG PAR ‘GRO BA MED LA, DE MED NA LAM SGOM PA DON MED PAR ‘GYUR TE, GANG GI PHYIR CHOS NYID RTOGS PA DANG DE MTHAR THUG PAR ‘GRO BAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, BYANG SEMS RNAMS DKA’ BA BRGYA PHRAG RTZOM PA YIN NO,,

If there were no reality that were ultimate, then there would be no such thing to serve as the ultimate object of realization.  And if that were so, then the whole practice of the path would be meaningless; after all, the very reason that bodhisattvas undertake their thousands of hardships is precisely for the purpose of perceiving the real nature of things, and to reach the final end of that undertaking.


[3759]
‘DIS NI CHOS NYID CES PA’I [f. 252b] DON DAM BDEN PA BLO GANG GI YANG YUL MA YIN PAR ‘DOD BZHIN DU, LAM LA DKA’ BA DU MA RTZOM PA NI, DBANG PO SHIN TU RTUL BAR STON PA YIN NO,,

Which is to say that—even as these people make the claim that ultimate reality can never be the object of any state of mind that exists—at the same time they undertake many hardships for the sake of the path.  It must be that they are demonstrating just how very dull their mental powers really are!


[3760]
DE LTAR YIN PA YANG DKON MCHOG SPRIN LAS, RIGS KYI BU DON DAM PA NI SKYE BA MED PA DANG, ‘GAG PA MED PA DANG, ‘JIG PA MED PA DANG, ‘ONG BA MED PA DANG, ‘GRO BA MED PA DANG, YI GE RNAMS KYIS BRJOD PAR BYA BA MA YIN PA DANG, YI GE RNAMS KYIS RAB TU BSNYAD DU MED CING, SPROS PAS RTOGS PA MA YIN PA STE, RIGS KYI BU DON DAM PA NI BRJOD DU MED CING, ZHI BA ‘PHAGS PA RNAMS KYIS SO SO RANG GIS RIG PAR BYA BA’O,,

The facts here are expressed with perfect clarity in the Cloud of Jewels:

O child of noble family, the ultimate is something that has no starting, and has no stopping, and cannot be destroyed.

It has no coming, and it has no going.

It is not something that can be expressed in words; no words can ever be given to it.

It is not something that could ever be realized through a state of mind that is still imagining things.

O child of noble family, the ultimate is something that could never be described: peace is something that is seen by realized beings themselves, one by one.


[3761]
RIGS KYI BU DON DAM PA NI DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS BYUNG YANG RUNG MA BYUNG YANG RUNG STE, GANG GI DON DU BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS SKRA DANG KHA SPU BREGS NAS GOS NGUR SMRIG BGOS TE, YANG DAG PAR DAD PAS KHYIM NAS KHYIM MED PAR RAB TU BYUNG ZHING,

O child of noble family, the ultimate is there whether Those Gone Thus ever appear in the universe, or not.  It is the reason why bodhisattvas cut off their hair and shave off their beards, and don the golden robe.  It is why, out of perfect faith, they leave behind the home life, leaving the house to go where they have no house.


[3762]
RAB TU BYUNG NAS KYANG CHOS NYID DE THOB PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR, SKRA ‘AM GOS LA ME SHOR BA LTAR BRTZON ‘GRUS RTZOM ZHING GNAS PA RNAM PAR ‘JIG PA MED PA’O,,

For the reason that they leave the home is to attain this real nature of things.  They make efforts with the same urgency they would show if their hair or clothes were to catch on fire; this is how they live, and they have no fear of anything.


[3763]
RIGS KYI BU GAL TE DON DAM PA YOD PAR MA GYUR NA NI, TSANGS PAR SPYOD PA DON MED PAR ‘GYUR ZHING, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS BYUNG BA DON MED PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And if, o child of noble family, there were no ultimate, then the life of purity that these individuals follow would be meaningless; and there would be no point at all to Those Gone Thus appearing in the world.


[3764]
GANG GI PHYIR DON DAM PA DE YOD PA DE’I PHYIR BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS LA DON DAM PA LA MKHAS PA ZHES BYA’O, ZHES SHIN TU GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

But because the ultimate does exist, then we can say things like “the bodhisattvas are masters of the ultimate.”


[3765]
BRJOD DU MED PA DANG, SPROS PAS RTOGS PAR BYA BA MIN PA NI, RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I YE SHES KYIS DON DAM PA GZIGS PA BZHIN DU, SGRA RTOG GIS YUL DU BYED MI NUS [f. 253a] PA’I DON YIN GYI, SPYIR RTOGS MI NUS PA MIN NO,,

When we say here that things are indescribable, or that they are not something which can ever be perceived by a mind still imagining things, what we mean is that they are things which cannot serve as an object for thinking which is still verbal—not in the same way as they can be perceived by the wisdom beyond all thought, which sees the ultimate.  We are not though claiming that, in general, these things cannot be perceived at all.


[3766]
DON DAM BDEN PA YOD PA MIN PA LA GNOD PA BSTAN ZHING, DE’I LDOG PA ‘PHANGS PA BSTAN PA NA’ANG YOD PAR GSUNGS SHING SNGAR YANG YOD PAR BSTAN PAS, MED PA DANG YOD PA MIN PA LA KHYAD PAR ‘BYED PA NI BLO GROS SHIN TU DMAN PAR STON PA TZAM MO,,

Arguments are presented against the idea that ultimate reality is not something that could exist; and there are as well presentations which demonstrate that the opposite of this idea is necessarily implied.  And it has, already, been described earlier how this reality does exist.  As such, when you try to draw some distinction here between not existing and not being something which does exist, all you are doing is demonstrating just how very inferior your thinking processes are.


[3767]
PA TSAB KYI ‘GYUR GYI DPE MANG PO LAS, BYUNG YANG RUNG MA BYUNG YANG RUNG STE, GANG GI DON DU ZHES ‘BYUNG YANG, NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, MA BYUNG YANG RUNG DON DAM PA NI NYAMS PA MED PA YIN PAS ZHES ‘BYUNG BA NI, SNGAR ‘GREL PAR MDO DRANGS PA LAS, MA BYUNG YANG RUNG CHOS RNAMS KYI CHOS NYID ‘DI NI GNAS PA NYID DO, ZHES ‘BYUNG BA DANG MTHUN PAS LEGS PA YIN NO,,

Many of the manuscripts of Patsab’s translation read: “For whatever the reason, whether it is the case that it has occurred, or has not occurred.”  Naktso’s translation reads, “For the reason that the ultimate never declines, even if it were something that never came about.”  This latter version accords with what we see in the autocommentary, where it quotes the sutra: “Even if it were something that never came about, the real nature of things is quite certainly something that stays.”  As such, we can say that this version is preferred.


[3768]
‘DIR SMRAS PA, KYE MA MA {%LA? both carvings say MA MA} LA GANG ZHIG DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA CUNG ZAD KYANG MI ‘DOD CING, GLO BUR DU BCOS MA MA YIN PA DANG, GZHAN LA LTOS PA MED PA’I RANG BZHIN YANG ‘DOD PA KHYOD NI, PHAN TSUN ‘GAL BA’I DON BRJOD PA ZHIG GO ZHE NA,

And so we can say it this way.  Suppose you burst out with something like—

Oh my gosh!  You are people who can accept not even the slightest version of something existing through any nature of its own; and yet at the same time you have no problem with agreeing that there is some nature to things which is not something that was ever created in some occurrence of the moment—a nature which has never relied upon anything else.  And so you are expressing two ideas which simply contradict each other!


[3769]
‘DI NI KHYOD KYIS DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS KYI DGONGS PA MA RIG PA ZHIG STE, ‘DI’I DGONGS PA NI GAL TE MIG LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI RANG GI NGO BO RTEN CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA BYIS PA’I SKYE BOS GZUNG BAR BYA BA GANG YIN PA ‘DI NYID MIG LA SOGS PA DE RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN YIN LUGS YIN NA NI, RANG BZHIN DE PHYIN CI LOG GI BLOS KYANG MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA’I PHYIR, TSANGS PAR SPYOD PA DON MED PAR ‘GYUR NA,

But with this, the fact is that you are showing how you fail to understand the true intent of the classical commentary on the middle way.  What this is actually trying to say is that—suppose the essential nature of the eye and so on is that they occur through a process of dependence.  And suppose that people who are still infants hold to this idea.  If this by itself were the ultimate nature or way of being for the eye and so forth, then it would be the case that even a mistaken state of mind could perceive this nature directly.  And then living the entire life of purity would be pointless.


[3770]
GANG GI PHYIR MIG SOGS RTEN ‘BREL YIN PA ‘DI RANG BZHIN YIN LUGS MA YIN PA [f. 253b] DE’I PHYIR, DE BLTA BA’I DON DU TSANGS PAR SPYOD PA DON DANG BCAS PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS TE,

And what’s being said here is that the fact that the eye and so forth are dependent is not the ultimate nature of things; which is why it is a meaningful exercise to follow the life of purity in order to be able to see that nature.


[3771]
RANG BZHIN BKAG PA NI MIG SOGS GSHIS LUGS YIN PA BKAG PA YIN LA, RANG BZHIN KHAS BLANGS PA NI BKAG PA DE MIG SOGS KYI CHOS NYID CES PA’I RANG BZHIN DU ‘DOD PA YIN PAS, DNGOS PO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA BKAG PA DANG, DNGOS PO’I CHOS NYID KYI RANG BZHIN KHAS LEN PA LA ‘GAL BA CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

When we say that we are denying a nature, we are talking about denying a primordial way of being for the eye and so on.  When we say that we accept a nature, we are agreeing to the idea that the denial just mentioned is the nature of the eye and the rest: what we call the true nature of these things.  As such, there is not the slightest contradiction between denying that things could exist through some nature of their own, and agreeing to a nature in that sense of a true nature to things.


[3772]
DE ‘DRA BA’I CHOS NYID DE YANG BDAG GIS KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA STE THA SNYAD TZAM DU GRUB PA LA LTOS NAS, BCOS MA MIN PA DANG GZHAN LA MI LTOS PAR BRJOD DO,,

This kind of a true nature to things is “what I am talking about when I speak of deceptive” reality; things that rely on existing only nominally—and it is something which is not artificial, or which does not depend upon something else.
 

[3773]
GANG ZHIG BYIS PA’I SKYE BO RANG DGA’ BAS BLTA PAR BYA BA MA YIN PA’I CHOS NYID DE NI RANG BZHIN DU RIGS LA, DE KUN RDZOB TU YOD PAR KHAS BLANGS PA DE TZAM GYIS DON DAM PAR DE DNGOS PO DANG DNGOS PO MED PAR RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA YANG MA YIN TE, DE NI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ZHI BA NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR,

A kind of true nature to things that would not be something which could be viewed by just everyday infants would be fitting as this nature.  And by the simple act of agreeing that this could exist in a deceptive way we can say that it is not something that could exist through some nature of its own—as an entity or a non-entity, in some ultimate way.  This is what we refer to as a perfect state of peace, or the end of existing through some nature of its own.


[3774]
RANG BZHIN CHOS NYID ‘DI NI SLOB DPON ‘PHAGS PAS ZHAL GYIS BZHES PA ‘BA’ ZHIG TU MA ZAD KYI, PHA ROL PO GZHAN YANG DON ‘DI KHAS LEN DU GZHUG PAR NUS PAS, RANG BZHIN ‘DI NI BRTZAD PA’I MTHAR RANG GZHAN GNYIS KA LA GRUB PA NYID DU YANG RNAM PAR BZHAG GO ,ZHES GSUNGS PA ‘DI KHYAD PAR DU NGES PAR BYA DGOS SO,,

Not only is this nature in the form of a true nature to things something that is accepted by our master, the Realized One; it is also possible for others of different positions to be guided into accepting this point.  As such, we can say that “When you come to the end of this examination of a nature to things, you are establishing something quite perfectly for both yourself and for others.”  We have to come to a special appreciation of this feature.


[3775]
GANG DAG ME LA SOGS PA’I RANG BZHIN YIN LUGS TSA BA LA SOGS PAR SMRA BA DE DAG GI LTAR ‘DOD NA NI, RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU DE MI RUNG STE, TSA BA SOGS NI BRTEN NAS SKYES PA NYID KYIS BCOS MA YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG, RGYU RKYEN LA BRTEN NAS [f. 254a] SKYES PA’I YOD PA YIN PA’I PHYIR,

Now there are some who profess that the nature of fire and so on—the way of being for these things—is hotness, or the like.  But it would be totally incorrect for us to agree with their position.  This is because the very fact of arising through some dependence upon hotness is to be artificial; and because this is an existence of having arisen through dependence upon causes & conditions.


[3776]
MIG SOGS DE BCOS MA NYID DU MED PA DANG, RGYU RKYEN GZHAN LA LTOS PA MED PA NYID DO, ZHES BRJOD PA YANG MI RIGS TE, DE LA ZHES BYA BA ‘DIS MCHOG TU ‘DZIN PA’I DNGOS PO MED PA’I PHYIR DANG, KUN RDZOB TU RNAM PA DE LTA BU’I DON BSTAN PA’I PHYIR TE, ZHES PA TSAB KYI ‘GYUR LAS ‘BYUNG LA,

“And yet it would be incorrect to say” that the eye and so forth were devoid of any artificiality; or that “they did not rely on something outside of themselves,” referring to causes & conditions.  “This is because, when we say ‘on that,’ what we are saying is that there is no entity which is considered preeminent; and deceptively speaking we are indicating that sort of object.”  This is the treatment that we see in Patsab’s translation.


[3777]
NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, DE LA ‘DI LTAR MCHOG TU ‘DZIN PA NYID MED PA’I PHYIR DANG, KUN RDZOB TU DON JI LTA BA BZHIN DU BSGRUBS PA’I PHYIR RO,, ZHES ‘BYUNG NGO,,

Naktso’s translation has: “…because there is absolutely no considering something preeminent in that way, with it; and in a deceptive sense, it exists in the way it should.”


[3778]
DE LA ‘DI LTAR ZHES ‘BYUNG BA LEGS LA, LHAG MA’I DON NI BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA’I ZHEN YUL GYI DNGOS PO MED PA DANG, KUN RDZOB TU BCOS MA DANG GZHAN LA LTOS PA’I RNAM PA DE LTA BU’I DON BSTAN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Here the presence of the phrase “in that way” is well done.  As for the import of the remainder, what’s being indicated is that there exists no entity which corresponds to what the tendency to hold things as real thinks it sees—along with the point that there is an aspect of being, in a deceptive way, artificial; and of relying upon something other.


[3779]
DE LTAR SLOB DPON ‘PHAGS PAS RANG BZHIN ZHAL GYIS BZHES PAR BSTAN PA ‘DIS, CHOS DBYINGS BSTOD PA LAS,
,STONG PA NYID NI STON PA’I MDO,
,RGYAL BAS JI SNYED GSUNGS PA KUN,
,DE DAG KUN GYIS NYON MONGS LDOG
,KHAMS ‘DI NYAMS PAR BYED MA YIN,

Once we understand through this presentation that the master, The Arya, accepts the idea of a nature to things, we can also go on to understand the following lines from A Praise of the Realm of Reality—

All of the various sutras
Ever spoken by the Victors
That presented the idea
Of emptiness

Were meant to stop
The negative emotions;
But they do nothing to diminish
This basic nature to things.


[3780]
ZHES STONG NYID STON PA’I MDO SDES BDEN ‘DZIN GYI NYON MONGS PA’I DMIGS GTAD ‘JIG PA YIN GYI, DE’I DMIGS GTAD BKAG PA’I STONG PA DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I KHAMS NYAMS PA STE MED PAR STON PA MIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PA YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

What this is saying is that the group of sutras that presents the idea of emptiness functions to destroy the point of view of our tendency to see things as real, a view involved with the negative emotions.  These lines were not though meant to say that the emptiness where we block what our mind thinks it saw somehow diminishes or obviates the basic nature of Those Gone Thus.


[3781]
DE LA MIG SOGS RNAMS MIG SOGS KYIS STONG PAR GSUNGS PAS NI, MIG SOGS RNAMS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID GSAL BAR MDZAD PA YIN GYI, MIG NANG GI BYED PA’I BDAG [f. 254b] DANG BRAL BA’I STONG PA’O ZHES NYAN THOS SDE PA ‘DOD PA DANG,

And so what does it mean, when we say that “the eye and the rest are empty of the eye and the rest”?  This is merely a clarification of the fact that the eye and so on are empty of existing through any nature of their own; but it is not, first of all, as the listener groups would have it, when they refer to an emptiness in the form of the eye being devoid of some inner self-nature.


[3782]
SEMS TZAM PAS MIG GZUNG ‘DZIN RDZAS THA DAD PA TZAM GYIS STONG NGO ZHES MIG SOGS RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS MI STONG PA’I GCIG LA GCIG MED PA’I STONG PA NYID DU ‘DOD PA LTAR NI MA YIN NO,,

Nor is it as the Mind Only school would have it, when they speak of an emptiness which is no more than the fact that the object and subject aspects of the eye are void of being essentially separate—an emptiness where the eye and so forth were not empty of existing through any essential nature of their own, but rather empty—each one—of being the other.



Three more kinds of emptiness

[3783]
GNYIS PA NI,

With this we have reached our second point from above: an explanation of the remaining three types of emptiness here.



2) Emptiness on the outside


	[3784]
[VI.183]
Rūpaṃ rūpeṇa vai śūnyam asyaiṣā prakṛtir yataḥ,
Evaṃ śabdā rasā gandhā dharmāḥ spraṣṭavyam eva ca

,GANG PHYIR DE YI RANG BZHIN DE,
,YIN PHYIR GZUGS NI GZUGS KYIS STONG,
,SGRA DANG DRI RO REG BYA DANG,
,CHOS RNAMS NYID KYANG DE BZHIN NO,

	Form is empty
	Of existing through form,	

	Due to the fact
	That the very nature
	Of it is that.


[VI.184a]
Rūpāder niḥsvabhāvatvaṃ bahirdhāśūnyatā matā,
Ubhayor asvabhāvatvaṃ bahirdhādhyātma śūnyatā.

,GZUGS SOGS RANG BZHIN MED PA NYID,
,PHYI ROL STONG PA NYID DU ‘DOD,

		The fact of
The lack of a nature
		To form and the rest
		Is what we say is
		“Emptiness on the outside.”


[3785]
RGYUD KYIS MA BSDUS PA’I GZUGS LA SOGS PA’I YUL DRUG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA’I RANG BZHIN MED PA NYID NI, PHYI ROL GYI STONG PA NYID DU ‘DOD DO,,

Consider next then the fact of the lack of a nature to things like physical form and the rest which are not taken in by a person’s mind stream; we are talking about the six objects, and the fact that they are empty of existing through any nature of their own.  This then is what we say is “emptiness on the outside.”


[3786]
PHYI’I GZUGS NI GZUGS KYI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NI, GANG GI PHYIR GZUGS DE’I RANG BZHIN NI DE YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Outer form then is empty of existing through some essential nature of being form; and that in turn is due to the fact that the very nature of form—of it—is that.


[3787]
SGRA DANG DRI DANG RO DANG REG BYA DANG CHOS RNAMS NYID KYANG STONG TSUL DE BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And one should understand—in the very same manner—the way in which sound, smell, taste, tangibles, and things in general are empty.


[3788]
‘DI DANG LHAG MA RNAMS LA MDOR THER ZUG TU GNAS PA MIN PA DANG, ‘JIG PA MIN PA’I PHYIR ZHES GSUNGS PA NI SNGAR NANG STONG PA NYID KYI SKABS SU BSHAD PA BZHIN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

When these and the remaining ones are described, in sutra, as “not remaining in any solid way,” or as “never stopping,” you should understand the references in the same way as we explained it earlier, in the section about emptiness on the inside.



3) Emptiness on the outside and the inside

	[3789]
[VI.184b]
,GNYIS CHAR RANG BZHIN MED NYID NI,
,PHYI NANG STONG PA NYID YIN NO,

		It is both;
		And the fact
		That it does not exist

		Through any
		Essential nature

		Constitutes emptiness
		On the outside
		And the inside.


[3790]
SHES RGYUD KYIS BSDUS PA’I DBANG RTEN KHOG PA LTA BU NI SHES RGYUD KYIS BSDUS SHING, DBANG POS MA BSDUS PAS NA PHYI NANG GNYIS CHAR YIN LA,

Now something like the general bodily container, subsumed by our flow of awareness, is an example of something which is both subsumed by mental awareness but is not subsumed by the sense powers.  As such, it is considered both outside and inside.


[3791]
DE RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA’I RANG BZHIN MED PA NYID NI, PHYI NANG GI STONG PA NYID DE LHAG MA SNGAR BZHIN NO,,

The lack of a nature to this container—the fact that it does not exist through any essential nature of its own—constitutes emptiness on the outside and the inside.  And the rest follows as before.



4) Emptiness emptiness


	[3792]
[VI.185]
Dharmāṇāṃ niḥsvabhāvatvaṃ śūnyatetyucyate budhaiḥ,
Sā cāpi śūnyatā śūnyā śūnyatārūpato matā.

,CHOS RNAMS RANG BZHIN MED PA NYID,
,MKHAS PAS STONG PA NYID CES BSNYAD,
,STONG NYID DE YANG STONG NYID KYI,
,NGO BOS STONG PAR ‘DOD PA YIN,

		The fact that entities
		Are without any nature
		Of their own is what
		
		Masters refer to
		As emptiness.

		We assert that
		The fact that
		They are empty

		Is in turn also empty
		Of some essential nature
		Of emptiness itself.		


[3793]
PHYI NANG GI CHOS RNAMS SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR RANG BZHIN KYIS GRUB PA MED PA NYID NI, DE KHO NA LA MKHAS PAS RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID CES BSNYAD DO,,

Now the fact that both outside and inside entities, as previously explained, are without any existence that has come about through any nature of their own is what those who are masters of suchness refer to as the emptiness of any self-nature.


[3794]
PHYI NANG GI CHOS KYI RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID DE YANG STONG NYID KYI NGO BOS GRUB PA’AM BDEN PAS STONG PAR ‘DOD PA YIN NO,,

That is, we assert that the very fact that outer and inner entities are empty of any nature of their own is in turn also empty of any reality, or existence through some essential nature of emptiness itself.


	[3795]
[VI.186]
Śūnyatā śūnyatākhyā yā śūnyatāśūnyatā matā,
Śūnyatā bhava buddhīnām uktā grāha nivṛttaye.

,STONG NYID CES BYA’I STONG NYID GANG,
,STONG NYID STONG NYID DU ‘DOD DE,
,STONG NYID DNGOS PO’I BLO CAN GYI,
,’DZIN PA BZLOG PHYIR GSUNGS PA YIN,

		We say that
		The emptiness of
		The thing which
		We refer to itself
		As emptiness is
		“Emptiness emptiness.”

		These statements
		Were made in order
		To block the tendency

		Of those whose minds
		Were grasping,
		Holding that emptiness
		Was a real thing.


[3796]
DE LTAR NA STONG GZHI STONG NYID CES BYA BA’I STONG NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI, STONG PA NYID STONG PA NYID DU ‘DOD PA STE,

And so let us consider that emptiness of the thing which we refer to itself as emptiness, now in the sense of being the thing which is empty.  This is what, we say, is “emptiness emptiness.”


[3797]
[f. 255a] STONG PA NYID BDEN PAS STONG PAR GSUNGS PA NI STONG NYID DAM CHOS NYID LA DNGOS PO STE BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA’I BLO CAN GYI BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA BZLOG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR RGYAL BA’I YUM LAS GSUNGS PA YIN NO,,

These statements that emptiness itself is empty of any true existence were made in the Mother Sutras themselves, in order to block the tendency to hold things as being real, in the thoughts of those whose minds were already grasping to the idea that things could be real: who were holding that emptiness or ultimate reality itself was a real thing.


[3798]
DE LTAR YIN PAR YANG ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PAR BSTOD PA LAS,
,KUN RTOG THAMS CAD BSAL BA’I PHYIR,
,STONG NYID BDUD RTZI STON MDZAD NA,
,GANG ZHIG DE LA ZHEN GYUR PA,
,DE NYID KHYOD KYIS SHIN TU SMAD,
CES GSAL BAR GSUNGS SO,,

The fact that this is the case is clearly expressed in A Praise of the One Who Went Beyond the World:

You undertook to teach
The nectar of emptiness
To banish all the mistaken
Perceptions that people have.

One thing though
You disparaged completely:
Those attracted
To seeing it wrong.


[3799]
‘DI DAG GIS NI KHA CIG DON DAM PAR BDEN PA ZHES PA BDEN DNGOS RNAM PAR BCAD TZAM LA BYAS NAS DE BDEN GRUB TU SMRA BA DANG, GZHAN DAG DGAG BYA BCAD TZAM MIN PA’I SNGO SER LTAR SGRUB PAR RANG DBANG BA CHOS NYID DU BYAS NAS DE BDEN PAR ‘DOD PA GNYIS KA YANG RGYAL BAS SHIN TU SMAD PAR GSUNGS SO,,

What these lines are referring to is some people who take the expression “ultimate reality” as referring to the simple exclusion of entities that are real, and then say that that exists in truth.  And there are others who point to things like the colors blue or yellow—positive entities which are not the simple exclusion of the thing that emptiness denies—and say that, in their independent form, these are the real nature of things; thus asserting, in effect, that these things are real.  And what the lines are saying is that both these parties would be disparaged completely by the Victorious Buddhas.



The four starting with great emptiness

[3800]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: an explanation of the four types of emptiness starting with great emptiness.



5) Great emptiness

	[3801]
[VI.187]
Sattva bhājana lokasya niḥśeṣa vyāpakatvataḥ,
Apramāṇopamānena paryantābhāvato diśām.

,SEMS CAN SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN NI,
,MA LUS KHYAB BYED NYID PHYIR DANG,
,TSAD MED DPE YIS MU MTHA’ NI,
,MED PHYIR PHYOGS RNAMS CHEN PO NYID,

		Because the vessel of 
The world, or the
Living beings contained,

Extends in expanse
Over no less than
The entirety,

Our example of
The infinity has
No final edge;

And thus is massive
In the extent
Of the directions.


[3802]
SHAR LA SOGS PA’I PHYOGS LAS LOGS SHIG TU SNOD BCUD GNYIS MED PAS, SEMS CAN DANG SNOD KYI ‘JIG RTEN NI MI {%MA} LUS PA LA KHYAB PAR BYED PA NYID YIN PA’I PHYIR DANG,

Now neither of the two of the vessel of the world, or the living beings contained in it, are to be found in some location separate from the expanse of the different directions of east and the rest.  And that’s because the directions are something which extends in its expanse over no less than the entirety of this world composed of both living beings and the physical earth.  


[3803]
BYAMS SOGS TSAD MED BZHI SGOM PA NA PHYOGS KYIS KHYAB PA’I SEMS CAN KUN LA SGOM PAS, DMIGS PA’I SGO NAS TSAD MED PAR BZHAG PA’I PHYIR, 

And when we practice the four infinite meditations of love and the rest, we are meditating upon all the living beings subsumed by all the directions.  From the point of view of the objects we are focusing upon, then, we describe the meditation as “infinite.”


[3804]
PHYOGS TSAD MED PA’I DPE YIS TE TSAD MED PA BZHIN DU, DE LTAR SGOM PA LA YANG MU MTHA’ NI MED PA STE TSAD MED PAR BZHAG PA’I PHYIR PHYOGS BCU NI CHEN PO NYID DO,,

The infinity we’re talking about is similar to our example here of the infinity of the directions; that is, the meditation has no final edge either—it is defined as infinite—and thus it is massive in its extent, of the ten directions.


	[3805]
[VI.188]
Mahattvaṃ digbhir evāsāṃ daśānām api śūnyatā,
Yā mahāśūnyatā soktā mahāgrāha nivṛttaye

,’DI DAG BCU CHAR PHYOGS RNAMS KYIS,
,STONG PA NYID NI GANG YIN DE,
,CHEN PO STONG PA NYID YIN DE  {%TE?},
,CHEN POR ‘DZIN PA BZLOG PHYIR GSUNGS,

	The fact that
	All ten directions
	Are empty is
	“Great emptiness.”

	It was taught
	In order to stop
	The holding that
	They are vast.


[3806]
SHAR LA SOGS PA ‘DI DAG BCU CHAR PHYOGS RNAMS KYI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID NI GANG YIN PA DE NI CHEN PO STONG PA NYID YIN TE, PHYOGS RNAMS CHEN POR RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB [f. 255b] PAR ‘DZIN PA BZLOG PA’I PHYIR DU GSUNGS TE, PHYOGS LA PHYIN CI LOG TU ‘DZIN PA NI MU STEGS BYE BRAG PAS PHYOGS RNAMS RTAG PA’I RDZAS NYID DU ‘DZIN PA LTA BU’O,,

The fact that all ten directions of east and the rest are empty of existing through any essential nature of their own is “great emptiness.”  And it was taught in order to stop people from holding that the directions are vast in a way that exists through some nature of its own.  An example of taking the directions in a mistaken way would be where the River school called the Detailers holds that a direction represents some perfectly unchanging substance. 



6) Ultimate emptiness


	[3807]
[VI.189]
Paramārtho hi nirvāṇaṃ param etat prayojanam,
Tasya yā śūnyatā tena sā paramārtha śūnyatā.

,DE NI DGOS PA MCHOG YIN PAS,
,DON DAM MYA NGAN ‘DAS PA YIN,
,DE NI DE YIS STONG NYID GANG,
,DE NI DON DAM STONG NYID DE,

	This is of ultimate significance,
Here, nirvana; because
This is the highest purpose.

The fact that this
Is empty of its own—

This is ultimate emptiness.
	

[VI.190]
Nirvāṇe bhava buddhīnāṃ bhava grāha nivṛttaye,
Deśitā paramārthajñaiḥ śūnyatā pāramārthikā.

,MYANG ‘DAS DNGOS PO’I BLO CAN GYI,
,’DZIN PA BZLOG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR,
,DON DAM MKHYEN PAS DON DAM PA,
,STONG PA NYID NI BSTAN PAR MDZAD,

	The goal here
	Is to help put a stop
	To the tendency

		That people have
		In their mind
		To hold this nirvana
		As actual.

		This is why
		The one who knows
		The ultimate

		Undertook to teach
		This ultimate emptiness.


[3808]
DON DAM ZHES PA’I DON GYI SGRA NI ‘DI LA DON YOD DE ZHES PA LTA BU DGOS PA LA BYED PA DANG, DON LNGA ZHES PA LTA BU SHES BYA YUL LA BYED PA GNYIS LAS, ‘DIR NI MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA CHOS KYI SKU YIN TE, MYANG ‘DAS DE NI THOB PAR BYA BA’I DGOS PA MCHOG YIN PAS SO,,

When we call something “ultimate” or “of ultimate significance,” the word “significance” refers to purpose; as when we say “there is definitely a purpose to this.”  The same word can be used to refer to something that we perceive—an object—as when we speak of the five objects of the senses.  Of these two connotations, here we are speaking about nirvana, or the body of all things.  And that’s because attaining this particular nirvana is the highest purpose of all.


[3809]
CHOS SKU DE NI DE YI RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI, DON DAM PA STONG PA NYID DE,

And so consider the emptiness represented by the fact that this body of all things is empty of existing through any essential nature of its own.  This is what we refer to as “ultimate emptiness.”


[3810]
DE YANG MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA CHOS SKU DE LA DNGOS PO STE BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA’I BLO CAN GYI BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA BZLOG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DON DAM MKHYEN PA SANGS RGYAS KYIS DON DAM PA STONG PA NYID NI BSTAN PAR MDZAD DO,,

And our goal here is to help put a stop to the tendency that people have in their mind to hold this as being real: where they hold that this nirvana, this body of all things, is “actual”—meaning here “real.”  And this is why the Buddha, the one who knows the ultimate, undertook to teach this ultimate emptiness.



7) The emptiness of produced things


	[3811]
[VI.191]
Dhātu trayaṃ niruktaṃ vai saṃskṛtaṃ pratyayodayāt,
Tasya yā śūnyatā tena soktā saṃskṛta śūnyatā.

,RKYEN LAS BYUNG PHYIR KHAMS GSUM PO,
,’DUS BYAS YIN PAR NGES PAR BSNYAD,
,DE NI DE YIS STONG NYID GANG,
,DE NI ‘DUS BYAS STONG NYID GSUNGS,

	The three realms
	Are referred to
	As produced things,

	Since they come
	From conditions.

	That these are
	Completely empty
	Of any was taught

	As the emptiness
	Of produced things.


[3812]
RGYU RKYEN LAS BYUNG BA STE SKYES PA’I PHYIR KHAMS GSUM PO NI ‘DUS BYAS YIN PAR NGES PAR BSNYAD DO,,

The three realms of the universe are referred to as produced things, since they have arisen through a process of coming from causes & conditions.


[3813]
KHAMS GSUM PO DE NI DE YI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI, ‘DUS BYAS STONG PA NYID DU GSUNGS SO,,

And so then the emptiness of produced things was taught; which refers to the fact that these three realms are completely empty of any existing through some nature of their own.



8) The emptiness of things that exist
but were not produced


	[3814]
[VI.192]
Asaṃskṛtaṃ na yasyaitā utpāda sthitya nityatāḥ,
Tena yā śūnyatā tasya soktā’saṃskṛta śūnyatā.

,GANG LA SKYE GNAS MI RTAG NYID,
,DE DAG MED PA ‘DUS MA BYAS,
,DE NI DE YIS STONG NYID GANG,
,DE NI ‘DUS MA BYAS STONG NYID,

		Any entity
		Which is devoid
		Of any arising
		Or changing—

		And also devoid
		Of staying—

		Is what we refer to
		As “an existing entity
		Which has not
		Been produced.”

		The fact that
		This type is empty
		Of its own is

		“The emptiness of
		Things that exist
		But were not produced.”


[3815]
CHOS GANG LA SKYE BA DANG MI RTAG PA STE ‘GAG PA’AM ‘JIG PA DANG, GNAS PA LAS GZHAN DU ‘GYUR BA DE DAG MED PA NI ‘DUS MA BYAS SO,,

Now any existing entity which is devoid of any arising or quality of changing—which is to say, and stopping or being destroyed—and which is also devoid of any staying, and then turning into something else, all these qualities, is what we refer to as “an existing entity which has not been produced.”


[3816]
DE NI DE YI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI ‘DUS MA BYAS STONG PA NYID DU GSUNGS SO,,

And the fact that this type of entity is empty of any existence through some nature of its own was taught as “the emptiness of things that exist but were not produced.”



The four starting with
emptiness beyond all extremes

[3817]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third point: An explanation of the four starting with emptiness beyond all extremes.



9) The emptiness beyond all extremes


[3818]
MTHA’ NI RTAG PA DANG CHAD PA GANG DU BZUNG NA LOG PA’I G-YANG DU LTUNG BA YIN GYI, ‘DUS MA BYAS RTAG PA DANG DGRA BCOM PA LA LAS DBANG GI SKYE ‘CHI BRGYUD PA CHAD PAR ‘DZIN PA LTA BU NI MA YIN PAS, 

When we say “extremes” here, what we’re talking about is the edge of a cliff that you fall off of, when you make the mistake of holding that things could either last forever, or simply discontinue.  This is not the same thing we are talking about when we say that existing entities which are unchanging are, in fact, unchanging; or when people hold to the idea that enemy destroyers experience a discontinuation of the flow of birth and death necessitated by karma.


[3819]
GANG DU BZUNG [f. 256a] NA MI MTHUN PHYOGS KYI G-YANG DU LTUNG BA’I RTAG CHAD DANG, RTAG CHAD TZAM GYI KHYAD PAR PHYED PAR BYA’O,,

What we are talking about here is that idea about things lasting forever, or simply discontinuing, which—when you hold to it—serves to throw you off the cliff of the mistaken side of things.  We also need to be able to draw a distinction between this and some normal kind of lasting forever, or stopping altogether.


	[3820]
[VI.193]
Anto na vidyate yasya tad atyantaṃ nirucyate,
Tasya tenaiva śūnyatvaṃ kathyate’tyanta śūnyatā.

,GANG LA MTHA’ NI YOD MIN PA,
,DE NI MTHA’ LAS ‘DAS PAR BRJOD,
,DE DE KHO NAS STONG PA NYID,
,MTHA’ LAS ‘DAS PA STONG NYID BSNYAD,

	A situation where
	There is no case of
	An extreme

	Was described as
	“Going beyond
All extremes.”

What is the
Emptiness of this,
Simply that,

Is where we use
The expression
“Emptiness beyond
All extremes.”


[3821]
GZHI GANG LA MTHAR ‘DZIN DU LTUNG BA’I RTAG CHAD KYI MTHA’ NI YOD PA MIN PA DE NI, ‘DIR MTHA’ LAS ‘DAS PAR BRJOD DO,,

Here next let’s consider a situation where there is no case of falling into holding to an extreme: an extreme of either lasting forever or simply discontinuing.  This then was described as “going beyond all extremes.”


[3822]
MTHA’ BRAL DE NI MTHA’ BRAL DE’I RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA KHO NAS STONG PA NYID DE NI, MTHA’ LAS ‘DAS PA STONG PA NYID DU BSNYAD DO,,

And what we call “free of extremes” refers to the emptiness of this freedom from extremes; the fact that it cannot be “simply that”—referring to existing through some nature of its own.  We then use the expression here of “emptiness beyond all extremes.”


[3823]
‘DI NI TING ‘DZIN RGYAL PO LAS, YOD MED DANG GTZANG MI GTZANG GI MTHA’ GNYIS SPANGS NAS, DBUS LA’ANG GNAS PAR MI BYED DO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR MTHA’ SPANGS PA’I DBUS BDEN NAM SNYAM PA’I BDEN ‘DZIN BZLOG PA’I PHYIR DU GSUNGS PA STE,

All this recalls for example the King of Concentration, where it says that we should give up pairs of extremes such as existing or not existing; or else being clean or not being clean; but that neither should we then stay somewhere in the middle between these extremes.  This was spoken to help us stop our habit of wondering whether or not the view in the middle might exist in truth, once we have eliminated the two extremes in each case.


[3824]
DPER NA SEMS TZAM PAS RANG GI LUGS KYI RTAG CHAD SOGS KYI MTHA’ DANG BRAL BA’I DBUS SEMS BDEN GRUB TU ‘DOD PA LTA BU’O,,

This is similar for example to the case with the Mind Only school, where they hold as a middle view that the mind must exist in truth, once they have eliminated the two extremes of the mind either lasting forever or simply discontinuing.



10) The emptiness of no beginning or end


	[3825]
[VI.194]
Ādir avaram anto’graṃ tad abhāvena kathyate,
Saṃsāro’navarāgro hi gatyāgati viyogataḥ.

,THOG MA DANG PO THA MA MTHA’,
,DE DAG MED PAS ‘KHOR BA NI,
,THOG MA THA MA MED PAR BRJOD,
,’GRO ‘ONG BRAL PHYIR RMI [214a] LAM LTA’I,

	The cycle of suffering
	Was described as having
	
	No first beginning
	And no final end.

	This is because it has
	No beginning limit,
	Nor an ending limit.

	Coming and going
	Are devoid;
	As such, our existence
	Is similar to a dream [f. 214a].


[VI.195]
Svapnābhasya bhavasyāsya yā tenaiva viyuktatā,
Śūnyatānavarāgreti saiṣā śāstre nirucyate.

,SRID ‘DI DE YIS DBEN NYID GANG,
,DE NI THOG MA DANG THA MA,
,MED PA STONG PA NYID DO ZHES,
,BSTAN BCOS LAS NI NGES PAR BSNYAD,

	The fact that
	This is devoid
	
	Was referred to in
	The classical commentaries

	With the description,
	“Emptiness where there
	Is no beginning,
	And no end.”


[3826]
‘DI YAN CHAD DU MA BYUNG LA ‘DI NAS BYUNG ZHES PA’I THOG MA STE DANG PO DANG, ‘DI PHYIN CHAD DU MI ‘BYUNG ZHES PA’I THA MA’I MTHA’ DE DAG MED PAS ‘KHOR BA NI THOG MA DANG, THA MA MED PAR BRJOD DO,,

The cycle of suffering was described as having no first beginning, and as having no final end.  This is because it has no beginning limit in the sense of us being able to say, “Up to here, it didn’t happen; and then from this point on, it did.”  Nor does it have an ending limit, in the sense of us being able to say, “From this point on, it stopped occurring.”


[3827]
‘GRO ‘ONG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DANG BRAL BA’I PHYIR RMI LAM LTA BU’I SRID PA ‘DI, SRID PA DE YI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS DBEN PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI, THOG MA DANG THA MA MED PA’I STONG PA NYID DO ZHES BSTAN BCOS CHEN PO RGYAL BA’I YUM LAS NI NGES PAR BSNYAD DO,,

Coming and going are devoid of existing through any nature of their own; as such, our existence is similar to a dream.  And the fact that this existence is perfectly devoid of existing through any nature of its own was referred to in the “great classical commentaries”—here referring to the sutras of the Mother of the Victors—with the description, “emptiness where there is no beginning, and no end.”



11) The emptiness that can never be given up


	[3828]
[VI.196]
Avakāro’vakiraṇaṃ choraṇaṃ hi nirucyate,
Na tyāgo’navakāras tu choraṇaṃ yan na kasyacit.

,DOR BA CES BYA ‘THOR BA DANG,
,’BOR BA LA NI NGES PAR BRJOD,
,DOR MED GTONG PA MED PA STE,
,’GA’ YANG DOR MED GANG YIN PA’O,

		The expression “given up”
		Can be used both
		In the sense of
		“Throwing off”
		And “abandoning.”

		“Never given up”
		Means “cannot
		Be sent off”:

A reference to
No kind of thing		
		That could ever 
		Be relinquished.


[3829]
DOR BA ZHES BYA BA NI ‘THOR BA DANG ‘BOR BA LA NI NGES PAR BRJOD LA, DOR BA DE MED PA NI PHAR LA GTONG BA MED PA STE RANG GI NGO BO ‘GA’ DANG DUS ‘GAR YANG DOR DU MED PA STE DOR DU MI RUNG BA THEG CHEN [f. 256b] GANG YIN PA’O,,

Now the expression “given up” can be used both in the sense of “throwing off” and “abandoning.”  And when we say “it is never given up,” what we are saying is that it cannot be sent off, away from us.  Which is to say, there is no kind of essential nature to things, nor any particular time, where and when this could ever be relinquished; and this is a reference to the greater way, which is never something that we should ever give up.


	[3830]
[VI.197]
Tenaivānavakāreṇa yā tasyaiva hi śūnyatā,
Śūnyatānavakārākhyā tasmād eṣā nirucyate.

,DOR BA MED PA DE NYID KYIS,
,DE NYID STONG PA NYID GANG YIN,
,DE DE’I PHYIR NA DOR MED PA,
,STONG PA NYID CES BYA BAR BRJOD,

		It is an essential
		Never being given up;

		The fact of the emptiness
		Of this particular object
		Was then referred to
		As emptiness:

		This is because of
		Its being something
		That we should
		Never relinquish.		


[3831]
DOR BA MED PA NI DOR BA MED PA DE NYID KYI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA DE NYID KYI STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI, DOR BA MED PA STONG PA NYID CES BYA BAR BRJOD DE, STONG NYID DE DOR BA MED PA’I RANG BZHIN YIN PA DE’I PHYIR NA’O,,

This quality of never being given up is an essential never being given up which is empty of existing through any nature of its own.  The fact of the emptiness of this particular object was then referred to as “the emptiness of never being given up”; and this is because this particular kind of emptiness has a nature of being something that we should never relinquish.



12) The emptiness of any nature

	[3832]
[VI.198]
Śikṣaiḥ pratyeka buddhaiś ca bodhisatvais Tathāgataiḥ,
Svabhāvaḥ saṃskṛtādīnāṃ yato naiva kṛtas tataḥ.

,’DUS BYAS LA SOGS NGO BO NYID,
,GANG PHYIR SLOB MA RANG SANGS RGYAS,
,RGYAL SRAS DE BZHIN GSHEGS RNAMS KYIS,
,MA MDZAD DE’I PHYIR ‘DUS BYAS LA,

	The essential nature
	Of produced things
	And the like has been
	Named their “very nature.”

	And why is it so?
	The essential nature
	Of produced things
	And such is not something
	That was ever created

	By the students,
	Or self-made Buddhas,
	Or children of the Victors,
	Or Those Who Have Gone
	That Way.  The essential nature


[VI.199]
Svabhāvaḥ saṃskṛtādīnāṃ prakṛtitvena kathyate,
Tayaiva śūnyatā tasyā yā sā prakṛti śūnyatā.

,SOGS PA RNAMS KYI NGO BO NYID,
,RANG BZHIN NYID DU BSNYAD PA STE,
,DE NYID KYIS DE STONG NYID GANG,
,DE NI RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID,

		Of produced things
		And the like
Has been named 
Their “very nature.”

This very thing
Is empty of itself;
		
		And this fact then
		Is the emptiness
		Of any nature.


[3833]
‘DUS BYAS LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI NGO BO CHOS NYID NI, RANG BZHIN NYID DU BSNYAD CING BRJOD PA STE,

The essential nature or essence of produced things and the like has been named their “very nature.”


[3834]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA ‘DUS BYAS LA, SOGS PA RNAMS KYI NGO BO CHOS NYID NI, SLOB MA NYAN THOS DANG, RANG SANGS RGYAS DANG, RGYAL SRAS BYANG SEMS DANG DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS KYIS MA MDZAD CING, DE GSAL BAR BYED PA YIN LA, GDOD MA NAS DE DAG GI GSHIS SU GNAS PA DE’I PHYIR RO,,

And why is it so—what is the reason?  The very nature or essential nature of produced things and such is not something that was ever created or revealed by the “students” (referring to the listeners); or by the self-made buddhas; or by the “children of the Victors” (the bodhisattvas), or by Those Who Have Gone That Way.  And that’s because these have been the very way of all things for time with no beginning.


[3835]
RANG BZHIN DE NYID DE NYID KYI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID DO,,

This very thing—this nature of things—is empty of existing in & of itself; which is to say, through some essential nature of its own.  And this fact then is the emptiness of any nature.


[3836]
‘O NA DON ‘DI STONG PA NYID STONG PA NYID KYI SKABS SU YANG BRJOD PA MA YIN NAM ZHE NA,

One may ask, “Wasn’t this point already expressed, when we discussed the emptiness of emptiness?”


[3837]
BDEN MOD ‘ON KYANG SKABS SNGA MAR NI PHYI NANG GI CHOS RNAMS KYI STONG NYID DE, DE KHO NA NYID ‘JAL BA’I RIGS SHES KYIS GRUB PAS BDEN PAR GRUB BAM SNYAM PA BSAL BA’I PHYIR YIN LA,

That is indeed the case, but in that previous instance we were referring to the emptiness of inner and outer entities.  And that was for the purpose of clarifying the question that might have come up, where someone asks, “Wouldn’t it be the case that if something were established by a logical perception which were holding suchness under consideration, wouldn’t that thing then exist in truth?”


[3838]
‘DIR NI SUS KYANG MA BYAS PAR GSHIS SU GRUB PA’I RANG BZHIN YIN NA, BDEN PAR GRUB BAM SNYAM PA BSAL BA’I PHYIR GSUNGS PAS MI ZLOS SO,,

Here though the kind of nature being considered is one in which there has been a natural existence, for all time—one which was never put together, by anyone at all.  And the reason we were mentioning that here was to prevent the possibility that someone might wonder whether this sort of nature might exist in truth.  As such, there is no redundancy here.


[3839]
DOGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN ‘DI GNYIS KA CHOS NYID LA YOD KYANG BDEN PAR GRUB PA ‘GOG NUS PA MI ‘GAL BA ‘DI SHES NA, DON DAM BDEN PA BLO GANG GIS KYANG MI RTOGS PAR ‘DZIN PA’I LOG PAR RTOG PA RNAMS LDOG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Both of the reasons why a person might hold some doubts here apply to a real nature of things; but there is no contradiction between them with reference to their ability to deny that things could exist in truth.  Once you realize this point, you can stop the wrong idea which questions whether or not ultimate reality is something that any state of mind could ever realize.



The emptiness of all things

[3840]
BZHI PA LA GSUM, [f. 257a] CHOS THAMS CAD STONG PA NYID DANG, RANG GI MTSAN NYID STONG PA NYID DANG, MI DMIGS PA DANG DNGOS PO MED PA’I NGO BO NYID STONG PA NYID BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our fourth point from above: an explanation of the four starting with the emptiness of all things.  Here we have three sections: an explanation of the emptiness of all things; an explanation of the emptiness of its own quality; and an explanation of both the emptiness of not seeing anything and the emptiness of true nature, beyond all things.



13) The emptiness of all things


	[3841]
[VI.200]
Dhātavo’ṣṭādaśa sparśāḥ ṣaṭ tajjā vedanāś ca ṣaṭ,
Rūpiṇo’rūpiṇo dharmāḥ saṃskṛtāsaṃskṛtās tathā.

,KHAMS BCO BRGYAD DANG RE {%REG?} DRUG DANG,
,DE LAS BYUNG BA’I TSOR DRUG DANG,
,GZUGS CAN GZUGS CAN MIN DE BZHIN,
,’DUS BYAS ‘DUS MA BYAS CHOS RNAMS,

	There are the eighteen
	Categories of existence;
	The six forms of contact;
	And the six forms of feeling
	That arise from these.

	There is everything
	That possesses form,
	And everything
	Which does not
	Possess such form.

	In the same way,
	We have those entities
	Which are produced things,

	And those which exist
	But which are not produced.


[3842]
CHOS THAMS CAD NI MIG SOGS RTEN DBANG PO’I KHAMS DRUG DANG, MIG GI RNAM SHES SOGS BRTEN PA RNAM SHES KYI KHAMS DRUG DANG, GZUGS LA SOGS PA DMIGS PA YUL GYI KHAMS DRUG STE KHAMS BCO BRGYAD DANG,

When we say “all things,” what are we referring to?  First there are the six categories of the sense powers: the bases of perception represented by the eye and so on.  Then there are the six categories of consciousness, meaning the consciousness of the eye and such.  Next we have the six objects: the objects of perception represented by visual form and the rest.  This then makes a total of eighteen categories of existence.


[3843]
MIG GI ‘DUS TE REG PA NAS YID KYI ‘DUS TE REG PA’I BAR REG PA DRUG DANG, REG PA DE DRUG LAS BYUNG BA’I TSOR BA DRUG DANG,

Along with that, we have the six forms of contact, referring to contact involving the eye up to contact involving the thoughts.  And then there are the six forms of feeling that arise from these six types of contact.


[3844]
GZUGS CAN DANG GZUGS CAN MIN PA NYID DANG, DE BZHIN DU ‘DUS BYAS DANG, ‘DUS MA BYAS KYI CHOS RNAMS SO,,

And then finally we have the divisions into everything that possesses form, and everything in existence which does not possess such form.  In the same way, we have those entitites which are produced things, and finally those entities which exist but which are not produced.


	[3845]
[VI.201]
Śūnyatā sarva dharmāṇāṃ yā teṣāṃ tair viyuktatā,
Rūpaṇāder abhāvo yaḥ sā svalakṣaṇa śūnyatā.

[VI.201a]
,CHOS DE DAG NI THAMS CAD KYI,
,DE DAG GIS DBEN STONG NYID GANG,

		All of these
		Various existing entities
		Possess an emptiness

		Where they are devoid
		Of their own.


[3846]
CHOS DE DAG THAMS CAD NI DE DAG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS DBEN PA’I STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA ‘DI NI, CHOS THAMS CAD KYI STONG PA NYID DO,,

Now all of these various existing entities possess an emptiness where they are devoid of existing through any essential nature of their own.  This then is the emptiness of all things.



The emptiness of its own quality, in brief

[3847]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, MDOR BSTAN, RGYAS PAR BSHAD, DON BSDU BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our third section—an explanation of the emptiness of its own quality.  Here we have three parts: a briefer explanation; a more detailed explanation; and then a concluding summary.



14) The emptiness of its own quality


	[3848]
[VI.201b]
,GZUGS RUNG LA SOGS DNGOS MED GANG,
,DE NI RANG MTSAN STONG PA NYID,

		Those things
		That can be pointed to
		As being form,

		And all the rest
		Which lack being
Things, is the emptiness
Of a thing’s own quality.


[3849]
GZUGS PHUNG GI MTSAN NYID NI GZUGS SU RUNG BA DANG LA SOGS PAS BSDUS PA RNAM MKHYEN GYI BAR GYI KUN BYANG GI CHOS RNAMS KYI RANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID DNGOS PO STE RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PA GANG YIN PA DE NI RANG GI MTSAN NYID STONG PA NYID DO,,

Here next we consider those things that can be pointed to as being form (which is in fact the definition of “form”), and “all the rest”—which includes all of those entities up to omniscience itself, whether they be on the negative side of things, or the enlightened side of things.  These are all things which lack any quality of being “things” in the sense of possessing, each one, their own quality; which is to say, they have no quality of existing through some essential nature of their own.  This then is the emptiness of a thing’s own quality.



Emptiness of own quality
related to the original condition

[3850]
GNYIS PA LA GSUM, GZHI’I CHOS DANG, LAM GYI CHOS DANG, ‘BRAS BU’I CHOS KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID DO, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our second part, of a more detailed explanation.  We proceed in three sections: the own quality of things related to the time of the original condition; the own quality of things related to the time of the path; and the own quality of things related to the time of the result.


	[3851]
[VI.202]
Rūpaṇālakṣaṇaṃ rūpaṃ vedanānubhavātmikā,
Nimittodgrahaṇaṃ saṃjñā saṃskārās tv abhisaṃskṛtiḥ.

,GZUGS NI GZUGS RUNG MTSAN NYID CAN,
,TSOR BA MYONG BA’I BDAG NYID CAN,
,’DU SHES MTSAN MAR ‘DZIN PA STE,
,’DU BYED MNGON PAR ‘DU BYED PA’O,

		What we accept
		Is that the “own quality”
		That form possesses
	
	Is that it can be pointed to
	As being form.

	Feelings consist of
That entity which
Possesses a self-nature
Of experience.

Discrimination
Holds to features;

And other factors
Act to bring together.


[VI.203]
Viṣayaṃ prati vijñaptir vijñānasya svalakṣaṇam,
Duḥkha svalakṣaṇāḥ skandhā dhātvātmāśīviṣaṃ matam.

,YUL LA SO SOR RNAM RIG PA,
,RNAM SHES RANG GI MTSAN NYID DO,
,PHUNG PO SDUG BSNGAL RANG MTSAN NYID,
,KHAMS KYI BDAG NYID SBRUL GDUG ‘DOD,

	The own quality
	For consciousness
	Consists of being

	A state of mind
	Which perceives
	Individual objects.

	The own quality of
	The parts to the person
	Is suffering; and

	The self-nature
Or own quality
Of the categories
Of existence is that
They are poisonous snakes.


[3852]
YANG GZUGS LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID CI YIN ZHE NA,

“What then,” one may ask, “is their ‘own quality,’ for things like form and the rest?”


[3853]
GZUGS NI GZUGS SU RUNG BA’I MTSAN NYID CAN TE, DE YANG MDO LAS, DGE SLONG DAG GZUGS [f. 257b] SU YOD CING GZUGS SU RUNG BA DE’I PHYIR GZUGS NYE BAR LEN PA’I PHUNG PO ZHES BYA’O, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The “own quality” that form, for example, possesses is that it can be pointed to as being form.  As sutra puts it, “O monks, when something exists as form, or can be pointed to as form, then we refer to it as the ‘part to the person taken on which is form’.”


[3854]
RANG GI MTSAN NYID ‘DI RNAMS DON LDOG YIN PA’I NGES PA MED PAR RANG RANG GI RANG BZHIN MTSON PA’I GTZO BO SMOS PA’O,,

Now there is no certainty, with these “own qualities,” that they will constitute the entirety of the opposite of all that the particular thing is not; rather, what we are referring to here is the primary attribute that represents their nature.


[3855]
TSOR BA NI BDE SDUG BTANG SNYOMS KYI MYONG BA’I BDAG NYID CAN NO,,

Feelings consist of that entity which possesses a self-nature of the experience of pleasure, pain, or neutral feeling.


[3856]
‘DU SHES NI PHYI’I MTSAN MA SNGO SER SOGS DANG, NANG GI MTSAN MA BDE SDUG SOGS KYI KHYAD PAR ‘DZIN PA STE, MTSAN MA NI YUL GYI SPU RIS SO,,

Discrimination is a state of mind which holds to outer features such as blue, yellow, or the like; and also to inner features such as pleasure or pain.  And when we say “feature” here, what we are referring to is a quality which allows us to make distinctions between different objects.


[3857]
‘DU BYED NI ‘DUS BYAS MNGON PAR ‘DU BYED PA STE PHUNG PO GZHAN BZHI LAS GZHAN PA’O,,

And then when we say “other factors,” what we are referring to are factors that act to bring together produced things, and are not included into the other four parts to the person.


[3858]
GZUGS SGRA LA SOGS PA’I YUL SO SO LA SO SOR RNAM PAR RIG PA NI, RNAM SHES KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID DO,,

The “own quality” for consciousness consists of being a state of mind which perceives individual objects: the individual entities of visual form, sound, and all the rest.


[3859]
PHUNG PO’I RANG GI MTSAN NYID SDUG BSNGAL DANG KHAMS RNAMS KYI BDAG NYID DE RANG GI MTSAN NYID NI, SBRUL GDUG PAS GZHAN LA BZUNG NAS GNOD PA SKYED PA DANG ‘DRA BA SEMS CAN RNAMS ‘KHOR BAR ‘DZIN PA’O,,

The “own quality” of the parts to the person is suffering; and the self-nature or “own quality” of the categories of existence is that they are poisonous snakes, meaning that when any other being tries to grasp them, they cause harm to that being.  Which is to say, they keep living beings turning inside this wheel of pain.


	[3860]
[VI.204]
Āyadvāratayoktāni Buddhair āyatanāni ca,
Yaḥ pratītya samutpādaḥ sa sāmagrī svalakṣaṇaḥ.

,SKYE MCHED RNAMS NI SANGS RGYAS KYIS,
,SKYE BA’I SGOR GYUR NYID DU GSUNGS,
,RTEN CING ‘BREL BAR ‘GYUR BA GANG,
,DE NI ‘DU ‘PHROD MTSAN NYID DO,

		The doors of sense
		Were described
		By the Buddhas as
		
		The very doors
		For growing.

		Its own quality for
That thing we refer to as
		A “dependent relationship”

		Is the coming together
		And contact.


[3861]
SKYE MCHED RNAMS NI SANGS RGYAS KYIS SDUG BSNGAL ‘BYUNG ZHING, SKYE BA’I SGOR GYUR PA NYID DU GSUNGS SO,,

The doors of sense were described by the Buddhas as the very doors through which suffering grows, or arises.


[3862]
DE GSUM NI ‘KHOR BA’I PHUNG KHAMS DANG SKYE MCHED LA DGONGS PA’O,,

Thus then these three were intended to refer to the heaps, the categories, and the doors of sense for the circle of suffering.


[3863]
RTEN CING ‘BREL PAR ‘BYUNG BA GANG YIN PA DE’I RANG GI MTSAN NYID NI RGYU RKYEN GYI ‘DU ‘PHROD KYIS RAB TU PHYE BA’O,,

And then that thing which we refer to as the occurrence of things through a dependent relationship is distinguished by the coming together and contact of causes & conditions, as its own quality.



Emptiness of own quality
related to the time of the path

[3864]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from above: the own quality of things related to the time of the path.


	[3865]
[VI.205]
Dāna pāramitā tyāgaḥ śīlaṃ cādāhalakṣaṇam,
Akopa lakṣaṇā kṣāntiḥ vīryasya tvanavadyatā.

,GTONG BA SBYIN PA’I PHA ROL PHYIN,
,TSUL KHRIMS GDUNG MED MTSAN NYID BZOD,
,KHRO MED MTSAN NYID BRTZON ‘GRUS KYI,
,KHA NA MA THO MED NYID DO,

		The perfection of giving
		Is giving away.

		The own quality
		For the ethical life
		Is turning away
		From the torment.

		The own quality
		Of patience is
		An absence of anger;

		And for joyful effort
		It is that free
		Of disreputable actions.


[3866]
SBYIN PA’I PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I MTSAN NYID NI, LUS DANG LONGS SPYOD DGE BA’I RTZA BA YONGS SU GTONG BA’I SEMS PA’O,,

The own quality for the perfection of giving is that movement of the mind where we want to give away, entirely, our own body; our possessions; and our roots of virtue.


[3867]
TSUL KHRIMS KYI MTSAN NYID NI NYON MONGS KYI GDUNG BA LAS DE MED PA’I BSIL BA THOB PA’O,,

The own quality for the ethical life is that we attain the cooling sensation of turning away from the torment of the negative emotions, and then having no more of them.


[3868]
BZOD PA’I MTSAN NYID NI KHRO BA MED PA STE DE LA SEMS KYI BSRAN ‘DZUGS NUS PA’O,,

The own quality of patience is an absence of anger; which is to say, the ability to place ones mind into a state of forbearance.


[3869]
BRTZON [f. 258a] ‘GRUS KYI MTSAN NYID NI, KHA NA MA THO BA MED PA’I DGE BA YONGS SU ‘DZIN PA LA SPRO BA NYID DO,,

The own quality of joyful effort is that perfect joy one feels about maintaining ones virtue, free of any disreputable actions.


	[3870]
[VI.206]
Saṃgraha lakṣaṇaṃ dhyānaṃ prajñā cāsaṅga lakṣaṇā,
Ṣaṇṇāṃ pāramitānāṃ vai lakṣaṇaṃ kathitaṃ tvidam.

,BSAM GTAN SDUD PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN,
,SHES RAB CHAGS MED MTSAN NYID DE,
,PHA ROL PHYIN PA DRUG RNAMS KYI,
,MTSAN NYID ‘DI DAG YIN PAR BRJOD,

		Meditation possesses
		Its own quality
		Of gathering together;

		The own quality of wisdom
Is a freedom from craving.

Thus the own qualities
Of the six different perfections
Have been described as
Being these ways.


[3871]
BSAM GTAN GYI MTSAN NYID NI DGE BA’I CHOS THAMS CAD SDUD PA’I PHYIR DU DGE BA’I DMIGS PA LA SEMS RTZE GCIG TU GNAS PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN NO,,

The own quality of meditation is that it possesses its own quality of being able to keep ones mind single-pointedly on a virtuous object, in order to gather together each and every virtuous quality.


[3872]
SHES RAB KYI MTSAN NYID NI CHAGS PA MED PA STE, MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PAR BGROD PA’I PHYIR DU, CHOS ‘GA’ LA YANG CHAGS PA STE BDEN ZHEN MED PA STE ‘GOG PAR BYED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The own quality of wisdom is a freedom from craving; that is, in order to help us to travel to the state of nirvana, it functions to stop us from believing in some real existence—which is itself a craving for any entity at all.


[3873]
DE LTAR NA PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA DRUG PO RNAMS KYI MTSAN NYID NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA ‘DI DAG YIN PAR MDO LAS BRJOD DO,,

Thus it is then that the own qualities of the six different perfections have been described in the sutras, as being the ways that we have now explained.


	[3874]
[VI.207]
Dhyānāni cāpramāṇāni ye cārūpyāś tathā pare,
Akopa lakṣaṇā eta uktāḥ samyak prajānatā.

,BSAM GTAN RNAMS DANG TSAD MED DANG,
,DE BZHIN GZHAN GANG GZUGS MED PA,
,DE DAG YANG DAG [214b] MKHYEN PA YIS,
,MI ‘KHRUG MTSAN NYID CAN DU GSUNGS,

		Then there are the
		Concentration levels
		And the immeasurables;

		And just so, other items:
		Those for the formless realm [f. 214b].

		These are what that
		Being of Perfect Knowledge
		Described as states

		Whose own quality was
		Beyond being disturbed.


[3875]
BSAM GTAN DANG PO LA SOGS PA BSAM GTAN BZHI RNAMS DANG, BYAMS PA TSAD MED LA SOGS PA TSAD MED BZHI DANG,

Let’s consider next the following list.  We start with the four concentration levels of the first concentration level and so on.  And then there are the four immeasurables, of immeasurable love and the rest.


[3876]
DE BZHIN DU SNGA MA GNYIS LAS GZHAN GANG NAM MKHA’ MTHA’ YAS LA SOGS PA GZUGS MED PA’I SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG PA BZHI PO DE DAG ,YANG DAG MKHYEN PA YI SANGS RGYAS KYIS MI ‘KHRUG PA KHRO BA MED PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN DU GSUNGS TE, DE RNAMS NI KHRO BA SPANGS PAS ‘THOB PA’I PHYIR RO,,

Just so we have items that are other than the two just mentioned; for example, those four states of balanced meditation for the formless realm levels of infinite space and the rest.  These are what the Buddha, that Being of Perfect Knowledge, described as states whose own quality was beyond being disturbed—that is, free of all anger.  And that’s because these levels are attained by eliminating, within ourselves, anger.


	[3877]
[VI.208]
Saptatriṃśad bodhipakṣyā nairyāṇika svalakṣaṇāḥ,
Śūnyatāyā viviktatvaṃ lakṣaṇaṃ nopalambhanāt.

,BYANG CHUB PHYOGS CHOS SUM CU BDUN,
,NGES PAR ‘BYUNG BYED RANG MTSAN NYID,
,STONG PA NYID KYI MTSAN NYID NI,
,DMIGS PA MED PAS RNAM DBEN NYID,

		The own quality
		Of the 37 elements
		Of enlightenment

		Is those points
		Which produce 
		Our release.

		Its own quality
		For emptiness
		Is that very quality
		
Of being devoid,
		No longer focusing.


[3878]
BYANG CHUB KYI PHYOGS KYI CHOS SUM CU RTZA BDUN GYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID NI, GANG DU NGES PAR ‘BYUNG SA THAR PAR NGES PAR ‘BYUNG BAR BYED PA’O,,

The own quality of the 37 elements of enlightenment is described as those points which produce our release: at which we attain the level of release—that is, freedom.


[3879]
RNAM PAR THAR PA’I SGO STONG PA NYID KYI MTSAN NYID NI BDEN ‘DZIN GYI DMIGS GTAD KYI RTOG PA’I DRI MAS MA SBAGS PA’I PHYIR RNAM PAR DBEN PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN NO,,

Its own quality for the door to freedom of emptiness is that very quality of being devoid, in the sense that we are no longer defiled by the stench of misperception: the manner in which holding that things are real focuses upon its objects.


	[3880]
[VI.209]
Śāntatā tvanimittasya duḥkhāmohas tu lakṣaṇam,
Tṛtīyasya vimokṣāṇāṃ lakṣaṇaṃ tu vimocanam.

,MTSAN MA MED PA ZHI NYID DE,
,GSUM PA’I MTSAN NYID SDUG BSNGAL DANG,
,GTI MUG MED RNAM THAR RNAMS KYI,
,MTSAN NYID RNAM PAR GROL BYED PA’O,

		That beyond all signs
		Has its own quality
		Of peace;

		Its own quality
		For the third
		Is a freedom from
		Suffering and
		Dark ignorance.

		The own quality
		For the freedoms
		Is that they act
		To liberate us.


[3881]
RNAM PAR THAR PA’I SGO MTSAN MA MED PA NI MTSAN MA MA DMIGS PA’I SGO NAS ZHI BA’I MTSAN NYID CAN NO,,

The door to freedom beyond all signs has its own quality of peace, in the sense of no longer perceiving signs.


[3882]
RNAM PAR THAR PA’I SGO [f. 258b] GSUM PA SMON PA MED PA’I MTSAN NYID NI, ‘DU BYED SDUG BSNGAL GYI BDAG NYID CAN RNAMS LA SDUG BSNGAL DU YANG DAG PAR RJES SU LTA BA DANG, DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA’I SHES RAB KYIS ‘DU BYED KYI YIN LUGS LA LTA BA NA, SRID PA’I PHUN TSOGS LA MI SMON ZHING,

And then here is its own quality for the third of the doors to freedom: the one beyond all aspirations.  Here first we recognize, perfectly, that factors which have a self-nature of suffering are indeed suffering.  And when we use wisdom which realizes the suchness of things to look into how it is that factors exist, we no longer have any aspiration for the good things of the cycle of pain.


[3883]
‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I GO ‘PHANG LA YANG BDEN PAR ‘DZIN PA’I SGO NAS SMON PA MED PA’I PHYIR NA, SDUG BSNGAL DANG GTI MUG MED PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN NO,,

Moreover, we have no further aspiration for the state of going beyond the world—in the sense of holding this to exist in some real way.  As such, this door displays, as its own nature, a freedom from both suffering and dark ignorance.


[3884]
RNAM PAR THAR PA BRGYAD PO RNAMS KYI MTSAN NYID NI, SNYOMS ‘JUG GI SGRIB PA LAS RNAM PAR GROL BAR BYED PA’O,,

The own quality for the eight freedoms is that they act to liberate us from impediments to balanced meditation.


[3885]
RNAM PAR THAR PA BRGYAD NI NANG LA GZUGS CAN DU ‘DU SHES PA MA BSHIG PAR PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS LA LTA BA DANG, NANG LA ‘DU SHES DE BSHIG NAS PHYI ROL GYI GZUGS LA LTA BA’I RNAM THAR GNYIS NI, SPRUL PA LA GEGS BYED PA’I SGRIB PA’I GNYEN PO’O,,

Within the eight types of freedom, we have the freedom where we look at outer forms without having disassembled our conceiving of things possessed of form on the inside.  And then we have the freedom where we look at outer forms after having disassembled this conception about the inside.  These two types of freedom then act as antidotes for obstacles which block our ability to emanate ourselves.
  

[3886]
‘GREL PA’I DPE MANG PO LA GNYIS PA LA NANG GZUGS SU ‘DU SHES PA ZHES ‘BYUNG BA NI MA DAG PA’O,,

In many manuscripts of the autocommentary, we see for the second the wording “conception of inside form.”  This is a textual corruption.


[3887]
SDUG PA’I RNAM PAR THAR PA BSAM GTAN BZHI PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN NI GSUM PA STE, GZUGS SDUG PA SPRUL PA LA DGA’ BA DANG, MI SDUG PA SPRUL PA LA MI DGA’ BA’I KUN NAS NYON MONGS PA’I GNYEN PO’O,,

The third one is the freedom of the attractive, with an own nature of the fourth concentration level.  This is an antidote to the completely negative attitude of enjoying emanating attractive forms, and then not enjoying emanating unattractive forms.


[3888]
MTHONG CHOS BDER GNAS KYI LAM LA GNYIS LAS THAR PA DANG MTHUN PAR GNAS PA’I LAM LA, GZUGS MED KYI SNYOMS ‘JUG BZHI’I RNAM PAR THAR PA DANG, ZHI BAR GNAS PA’I LAM LA ‘DU SHES DANG TSOR BA ‘GOG PA ‘GOG PA’I SNYOMS ‘JUG GI RNAM THAR GCIG GO

There are two points to the path where we remain in joy about things we have seen.  First there is the freedom of the four balanced meditations of the formless realm.  And then there is the one freedom of cessation meditation, where on the path of remaining in peace we put a stop to discriminations and feelings.



Emptiness of own quality
related to the time of the result

[3889]
,GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third point from above: the own quality of things related to the time of the result.


	[3890]
[VI.210]
Suviniścita rūpāṇi balāni kathitāni ca,
Supratiṣṭhita rūpāṇi vaiśāradyāni tāyinaḥ.

,STOBS RNAMS SHIN TU RNAM PAR NI,
,GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA’I RANG BZHIN GSUNGS,
,SKYOB PA’I MI ‘JIGS PA RNAMS NI,
,SHIN TU BRTAN PA’I NGO BO YIN,

		The forces were said
To have a quality of
		Establishing one deeply.

		The forms of
		Fearlessness of
		The Protector

		Have an essential
Nature of being
Extremely steadfast.


[3891]
‘CHAD ‘GYUR GYI STOBS BCU PO RNAMS NI, SHIN TU RNAM PAR GTAN LA [f. 259a] ‘BEBS PA’I RANG BZHIN NAM MTSAN NYID CAN DU RIG PAR BYA STE, YUL RNAMS SHIN TU GTAN LA ‘BEBS PA NYID KYIS, YUL LA ‘JUG PA LA THOGS PA MED PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN YIN PA’I PHYIR STOBS ZHES BYA’O,,

As for the ten forces that we will be explaining further on, one should understand that these have a quality, or own nature, of establishing one deeply.  That is, because we have an extreme ability to establish objects, there is an own quality of being able to engage in objects without the slightest resistance—and this then is why we speak of “force” here.


[3892]
SHES BYA THAMS CAD YANG DAG PA PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR RDZOGS PAR TE MA LUS PAR SANGS RGYAS PA STE THUGS SU CHUD DO, ZHES ZHAL GYIS BZHES PA DANG, NGA ZAG PA BAG CHAGS DANG BCAS PA ZAD DO ZHES PA DANG, NGAS CHAGS SOGS THAR PA’I BAR DU GCOD PA’I CHOS YIN NO ZHES PA DANG, SA LAM ‘DI LA NAN TAN DU BYAS NA SDUG BSNGAL ZAD PAR ‘GYUR RO ZHES DAM BCAS PA BZHI LA DE LTAR MIN NO,

Here we have the statement about the four declarations:

It is not so with these.  First there is the declaration that “I have reached that comprehension; I am enlightened towards all the knowable things there are; I grasp each and every one of them, unerringly, and in their entirety.”

Then there is the declaration that “I have finished off all impurity, along with the deep seeds for this impurity.”

Next there is the declaration, “I assert that craving and the like are things which act as an obstacle to freedom.”

And then finally we have the declaration that “If you make devoted efforts in these levels & paths, you will come to the end of your pain.”


[3893]
ZHES PA’I CHOS MTHUN GYI RGOL BA ‘GA’ YANG MA MTHONG BA’I SKYOB PA’I MI ‘JIGS PA BZHI PO RNAMS NI, SHIN TU BRTAN PA’I NGO BO NYID DE MTSAN NYID CAN YIN TE, RGOL BA SUS KYANG GZHAN DU BYA BAR MI NUS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

What this is referring to is the four forms of fearlessness of the Protector; and we can see no reasonable opponent who could question them.  These have an essential nature, an own nature, of being extremely steadfast, in that no opponent would ever be able to say that things were otherwise.


	[3894]
[VI.211]
Pratibhānādyanāccheda lakṣaṇāḥ pratisaṃvidaḥ,
Jagad dhitopasaṃhāro mahāmaitrī nirucyate.

,SO SOR YANG DAG RIG RNAMS NI,
,SPOBS SOGS TSAD MED MTSAN NYID CAN,
,’GRO LA PHAN PA NYER SGRUB PA,
,BYAMS PA CHEN PO ZHES BYA’O,

		The perfect understandings
		Of details—confidence
		And so on—have an
		Own nature of being
		Without any extent;

		And what we call
		“Great love” accomplishes
		Help for living beings.


[VI.212]
Mahākṛpā paritrāṇaṃ duḥkhināṃ muditā khalu,
Prāmodya lakṣaṇopekṣā jñeyāsaṃkīrṇa lakṣaṇā.

,SDUG BSNGAL CAN RNAMS YONGS SKYOB PA,
,THUGS RJE CHEN PO’O DGA’ BA NI,
,RAB DGA’I MTSAN NYID BTANG SNYOMS NI,
,MA ‘DRES MTSAN NYID CAN ZHES {%SHES} BYA,

		Great compassion
		Acts to protect,
		Entirely, those
		Who are suffering.

		Great joy has
		An own nature
		Of high joy.

		Equanimity
		Should be understood
		As having an own nature
		Of being unadmixed.		


[3895]
CHOS DANG DON DANG NGES PA’I TSIG DANG SPOBS PA SO SOR YANG DAG PAR RIG PA RNAMS NI, SPOBS PA LA SOGS PA BZHI CHAD {%TSAD} PA STE GTUGS PA MED PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN NO,,

Let’s consider next the perfect understandings of details, for the Dharma; meanings; different words for the same ideas; and confidence.  These four of confidence and so on have an own nature of being without any extent; which is to say, limit that they touch.


[3896]
‘GRO BA RNAMS LA PHAN PA DANG BDE BA NYE BAR SGRUB PA NI, BYAMS PA CHEN PO ZHES BYA BA’I MTSAN NYID DANG, SDUG BSNGAL CAN GYI SEMS CAN RNAMS YONGS SU SKYOB PA NI, THUGS RJE CHEN PO’I MTSAN NYID DO,,

And then the own nature of what we call “great love” is that it accomplishes help and happiness for all living beings.  And the own nature of great compassion is that it acts to protect, entirely, each & every suffering being.


[3897]
DGA’ BA CHEN PO NI RAB TU STE MCHOG TU DGA’ BA’I MTSAN NYID CAN NO,,

Great joy has an own nature of high—which is to say, supreme—joy.


[3898]
BTANG SNYOMS CHEN PO NI ‘GA’ ZHIG LA RJES SU CHAGS PA [f. 259b] DANG, ,GZHAN DAG LA KHONG KHRO BA LA SOGS PA DANG MA ‘DRES PA STE DE DAG DANG BRAL BA’I MTSAN NYID CAN DU SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And then great equanimity should be understood as having an own nature of being “unadmixed” with—which is to say, free of—feelings of attachment for some people and then anger towards other people, or anything of the like.


	[3899]
[VI.213]
Buddhasyāveṇikā dharmā daśa cāṣṭau ca ye matāḥ,
Tair ahāryo yataḥ śāstā tato’hāryasvalakṣaṇāḥ

,SANGS RGYAS CHOS NI MA ‘DRES PA,
,BCU DANG BRGYAD DU GANG ‘DOD DAG,
,GANG PHYIR STON DES MI ‘PHROGS PA,
,DE PHYIR MI ‘PHROGS RANG MTSAN NYID,

		The Dharma of the Buddhas,
		Which we assert
		Has those 18 qualities
		Of being unmixed,

		Has an own quality
		That it cannot
		Be stolen off.

		Why this is true
		Is for that reason
		That the Teacher
		Cannot be
		Stolen off.


[3900]
SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS NI, MA ‘DRES PA BCU DANG BRGYAD DU GANG ‘DOD PA DE DAG GZHAN GYIS MI ‘PHROGS PA’I RANG GI MTSAN NYID CAN TE, RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA STON PA LA MA ‘DRES PA’I MI MTHUN PHYOGS ‘KHRUL PA SOGS MI MNGA’ BAS DE RNAMS KYIS GLAGS MED PA NYID KYIS MI ‘PHROGS PA STE, THUB PAR MI NUS PA DE’I PHYIR RO,,

The Dharma of the Buddhas, which we assert has those 18 qualities of being unmixed, has an own quality that it cannot be stolen off by others.  The reason why this is true is that the Teacher has no nature of being mixed in with things like error, or ideas that would contradict their positions.  As such, their teachings cannot be “stolen off,” or defeated—for that simple reason that they cannot be defeated.


[3901]
MA ‘DRES PA BCO BRGYAD NI DRUG TSAN GSUM STE, SKU LA ‘KHRUL PA DANG, GSUNG LA CA CO DANG, THUGS LA BSNYEL BA DANG MNYAM PAR MA BZHAG PA DANG, ‘KHOR ‘DAS THA DAD DU ‘DZIN PA’I RTOG PA DANG SO SOR MA BRTAGS PA’I BTANG SNYOMS MI MNGA’ BA DRUG NI DANG PO’O,

These 18 qualities of being unmixed come in three sets of six each.  The first six consist of:

	(1) the holy actions of their body have no error;

	(2) the holy words of their speech have no chatter;

	(3-4) the holy thoughts of their heart have no forgetting, or period
		in which they are ever out of balanced meditation;

	(5-6) they have no idea that the circle of suffering, and passing
		beyond it, could ever be separate things; and they
		never go into a state of indifference, where they are
		not examining in an individual way.


[3902]
‘DUN PA DANG BRTZON ‘GRUS DANG DRAN PA DANG TING NGE ‘DZIN DANG, SHES RAB DANG RNAM PAR GROL BA NYAMS PA MI MNGA’ BA NI GNYIS PA’O,,

The second set of six consists of (7) aspiration, (8) effort, (9) recollection, (10) concentration, (11) wisdom, and (12) liberation which know no decline.


[3903]
LUS KYI LAS DANG NGAG GI LAS DANG, YID KYI LAS THAMS CAD YE SHES SNGON DU ‘GRO ZHING, YE SHES KYI RJES SU ‘BRANG BA DANG, ‘DAS MA ‘ONGS DA LTAR GYI DUS LA MA CHAGS PA DANG MA THOGS PA’I YE SHES KYI GZIGS PA ‘JUG PA NI GSUM PA’O,,

The third set of six consists of the fact that all of (13) their actions of body, (14) their actions of speech, and (15) their actions of mind are preceded by wisdom, and followed by wisdom; while they (16) have no attachment to things of the past or (17) things of the future or (18) things of the present, and engage in an unimpeded wisdom which sees into these.


[3904]
MA ‘DRES PA’I NGES TSIG NI CHOS DE RNAMS SANGS RGYAS KHO NA’I RTEN LA YOD KYI, RTEN GZHAN LA MED PAS RTEN MA ‘DRES PA’O,,

Why are these 18 called “unmixed”?  The point is that these are possessed in the person only of beings who are Buddhas, and are unmixed in the person of other subjects.


[3905]
‘DI DAG GI BSHAD PA NI ‘GREL PAR GZUNGS KYI DBANG PHYUG RGYAL POS ZHUS PA’I MDO DRANGS PA LAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

As for a further explanation of these qualities, the autocommentary allows us to learn them through references from The Sutra Requested by the King of the Lord of Secret Words.


	[3906]
[VI.214]
Sarvākāra jñatā jñānaṃ mataṃ pratyakṣa lakṣaṇam,
Anyat prādeśikatvena na pratyakṣam itīṣyate.

,RNAM KUN MKHYEN NYID YE SHES NI,
,MNGON SUM MTSAN NYID CAN DU ‘DOD,
,GZHAN NI NYI TSE BA NYID KYIS,
,MNGON SUM ZHES BYAR MI ‘DOD DO,

		The wisdom of
		Omniscience itself
		Is something that

		We hold to have
		An own quality of
		The direct perception.

		Those other than this
		Are only partial;
		
		As such, we would not
		Refer to them
		As direct.


[3907]
RNAM PA KUN MKHYEN PA NYID KYI YE SHES NI, SHES BYA [f. 260a] THAMS CAD MNGON SUM DU MKHYEN PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN DU ‘DOD DE, RNAM MKHYEN DE LAS GZHAN PA’I SHES PA THAMS CAD NI YUL NYI TSE BA TZAM LA ‘JUG PA NYID KYIS, SHES BYA THAMS CAD MNGON SUM DU MKHYEN PA ZHES BYA BAR MI ‘DOD DO,,

The wisdom of omniscience itself is something that we hold to have an own quality of the direct perception of all knowable objects.  All states of mind other than this omniscience are limited to engaging in their objects in only a partial way; as such, we would not refer to them as the direct knowledge of all existing entities.


[3908]
DE LTAR GZUGS NAS RNAM MKHYEN GYI BAR GYI MTSAN NYID RNAMS NI, DE RNAMS MTSON BYED KYI RANG GI NGO BO TZAM YIN PAS, RTAGS KYI DGAG BYA’I RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA DANG KHYAD PAR SHIN TU CHE’O,,

All of these examples of own qualities for things from physical form on up to omniscience itself serve to typify these objects, and give only their essential nature.  As such there is a huge difference between these natures and the existence by nature or definition which is what we deny with our reasoning.



A summary on emptiness
of its own quality

[3909]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third point from before, which is the concluding summary.


	[3910]
[VI.215]
Yal lakṣaṇaṃ saṃskṛtānāṃ yac cāsaṃskṛta lakṣaṇam,
Tasya tenaiva śūnyatvaṃ sā svalakṣaṇa śūnyatā.

,GANG ZHIG ‘DUS BYAS MTSAN NYID DANG,
,’DUS MA BYAS PA’I MTSAN NYID GANG,
,RE RE KHO NAS STONG PA NYID,
,DE NI RANG MTSAN STONG PA NYID,

		The own nature
		Of those produced,

		And the own nature
		Of those which exist
		But were not produced,

		Is then for each of them
		Their emptiness
		Of that alone:

		Their emptiness
		Of some nature.


[3911]
GANG ZHIG ‘DUS BYAS KYI CHOS RNAMS KYI MTSAN NYID DANG, ‘DUS MA BYAS KYI CHOS RNAMS KYI RANG MTSON BYED KYI MTSAN NYID GANG YIN PA DE RNAMS, DE’I RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA DE KHO NAS STONG PA NYID DE NI RANG GI MTSAN NYID STONG PA NYID DO,,

And then let’s consider the own nature of those entities which are produced; and the own nature which typifies entities which exist but were not produced.  Their emptiness of “that alone”—referring to existing through some nature of their own—is then their emptiness of some own nature.



Emptiness of not seeing,
and true nature

[3912]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to the third part from before: an explanation of both the emptiness of not seeing anything and the emptiness of true nature, beyond all things.



15) The emptiness of not seeing anything

	[3913]
[VI.216]
Asthito vartamāno’yam atītānāgataṃ na sat,
Yatraite nopalabhyante’nupalambhaḥ sa ucyate.

,DA LTA BA ‘DI MI GNAS SHING,
,’DAS DANG MA ‘ONGS YOD MA YIN,
,GANG DU DE DAG MI DMIGS PA,
,DE LA MI DMIGS PA ZHES BRJOD,

		Those of the present
		Do not remain;

		And those of the past
		And the future;
		None of these exist.

		These things cannot
		Be observed, in any.

		As such,
		We refer to them
		As “unseen.”	


[3914]
DE {%DA} LTAR BYUNG BA ‘DI RANG GRUB PA’I DUS PHAN CHAD DU MI GNAS SHING, BYUNG ZIN ‘DAS PA NI BYUNG BA DE ZHIG PA YIN PA DANG, ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR MA ‘ONGS PA NI ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR DE DA LTAR MA SKYES PA’I PHYIR, GSUM PO DER YOD PA MA YIN NO,,

Now those things which have occurred in the present time do not remain beyond the point at which they have come into being.  And things which have already occurred—those in the past time—have already stopped.  Things which are yet to occur—those in the future—are still to come, and have not yet come to start in the present.  As such, none of these three exist as those.


[3915]
BYUNG ZIN DANG ‘BYUNG ‘GYUR DANG DA LTAR BA DE DAG RIM PA BZHIN DU ZHIG PA DANG MA SKYES PA’I DUS GNYIS DANG, RANG GRUB PA’I ‘OG GANG DU MI DMIGS PA DE LA NI MI DMIGS PA ZHES BRJOD DO,,

Those things that have already occurred; and those that are yet to occur; and those in the present cannot be observed—respectively—in any of the two times of either what has already stopped or what is yet to start; nor subsequent to their having occurred.  As such, we refer to them as “unseen.”


	[3916]
[VI.217]
Yā tasyānupalambhasya tat svarūpa viyuktatā,
Sākūṭasthāvināśenānupalambhākhya śūnyatā.

,MI DMIGS PA DE RANG NGO BO,
,DE YIS DBEN PA NYID GANG DE,
,THER ZUG GNAS MIN ‘JIG MIN PAS,
,MI DMIGS ZHES BYA’I STONG NYID DO,

		This state of being
		Unseen is entirely
	
		Devoid of existing
		In that essential way.

		It is not something
		That can remain
		In some solid manner,

		Nor is it something
		Which stops.
		
		As such, it is
		The emptiness,
		We say, of
		“Not seeing anything.”		


[3917]
MI DMIGS PA DE RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PA DE YIS DBEN PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI, THER ZUG TU GNAS PA MIN PA DANG, ‘JIG PA MIN PAS NA MI DMIGS PA ZHES BYA BA’I STONG PA NYID DO,

Consider then this state of being unseen; the fact that it does not exist through any pure, essential nature of its own: the fact that it is entirely devoid of existing in that way.  This is not something that can remain in some solid manner, nor is it something which stops.  As such, it is the emptiness, we say, of “not seeing anything.”



16) The emptiness of true nature, beyond all things

	[3918]
[VI.218]
Nāsti sāṃyogikaṃ rūpaṃ bhāvānāṃ pratyayodayāt,
Saṃyogasya tu tenaiva śūnyatābhāvaśūnyatā.

,RKYEN LAS BYUNG PHYIR DNGOS RNAMS LA,
,’DUS PA PA YI NGO BO MED,
,’DUS PA PA NI DE NYID KYIS,
,STONG NYID DNGOS MED STONG NYID DO,

		The functional
		Are “brought together,”
		Because they occur
		Through conditions,

		And an essential nature
		Of it has no existence.

		The fact that these
		Same things
		Of that convening
		Are empty

		Is what we refer to
		As “the emptiness
		Beyond all things.”


[3919]
RGYU DANG RKYEN LAS BYUNG BA’I PHYIR NA, DNGOS [f. 260b] PO RNAMS LA ‘DUS PA PA STE RGYU RKYEN ‘DUS PA LAS BYUNG BA’I NGO BO RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PAS, DE RNAMS LA DNGOS PO MED PA ZHES BYA LA,

We refer to functional entities as “brought together,” because they are something which occurs through causes & conditions.  That is, they possess an essential nature of having occurred through the convening of causes & conditions.  And since this essence has no existence as something that could exist through some nature of its own, we refer to these as “beyond all things.”


[3920]
‘DUS PA LAS BYUNG BA DE NYID KYI NGO BO NYID KYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID NI, DNGOS PO MED PA’I NGO BO NYID KYI STONG PA NYID DO,,

And the fact that these same things which have occurred through that convening are empty of existing through any perfect, essential nature of their own is what we refer to as “the emptiness of any perfect essential nature, beyond all things.”


[3921]
DE LTAR BCU DRUG TU BSHAD PA NI BDEN GRUB ‘GOG PA’I RIGS PA MI ‘DRA BA’I SGO NAS NI MIN TE, THAMS CAD LA YANG THER ZUG TU GNAS PA DANG ‘JIG PA MED PA’I RIGS PAS BSGRUBS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The explanation that we make this way, into sixteen different types, is not something that is accomplished through different types of reasoning which denies that things could exist as real.  And that’s because every single one of them is proven through the logic which shows that things cannot stay in any solid way; nor can they stop.


[3922]
GANG ZAG GCIG LA SPYIR BDEN MED DU SGRUB PA YANG MIN TE, GZHI MIG SOGS NANG GI CHOS RNAMS KYI STENG DU BDEN MED TSAD MAS GRUB NA GZHI GZHAN LA BLO KHA PHYOGS PA’I TSE, GZHAN GYIS SGRUB BYED BKOD PA LA MI LTOS PAR RANG GIS RTAGS LA BRTEN NAS THE TSOM CHOD PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

Nor is it the case that with a single individual we can establish that—in general—things have no real existence.  If we establish, with an accurate perception, the fact that nothing is real with regard to a particular locus—such as the inner entities of the eye and so on—then when we turn our minds to some other locus we are able to eliminate any doubts we may have had, based on the reason we used ourselves, and without relying upon any proof set forth by others.


[3923]
DE’I PHYIR GANG ZAG GCIG GI DBANG DU BYAS PA DANG, GZHI SO SO LA BDEN ZHEN SHAS CHE BA’I GANG ZAG SO SO’I DBANG DU BYAS PA GNYIS KA SHES PAR BYA’O,,

As such, both are to be understood with regard to a single person; and relative to each individual person who may display some strong belief in reality, for each individual locus.



The division of emptiness into four

[3924]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second more general point from above: a detailed explanation of the division of emptiness into four types.


	[3925]
[VI.219]
Ucyante bhava śabdena pañca skandhāḥ samāsataḥ,
Tair eva śūnyatā teṣāṃ yā soktā bhava śūnyatā.

,DNGOS PO’I SGRAS NI MDOR BSDUS NA,
,PHUNG PO LNGA RNAMS BRJOD PA YIN,
,DE RNAMS DE YIS STONG NYID GANG,
,DE DNGOS STONG PA NYID DU BSHAD,

		The term “things” refers,
		In a summary way,
To the five parts
To the person.

		That fact that these
		Are empty is what
		We refer to as
		“The emptiness of things.”		


[3926]
DNGOS PO STONG PA NYID CES BYA BA’I DNGOS PO’I SGRAS NI PHUNG PO LNGA RNAMS BRJOD PA YIN TE, DE YANG SO SOR MA PHYE BAR MDOR BSDUS NAS SPYIR BRJOD DO,,

When we say “the emptiness of things,” the term “things” refers to the five parts to the person.  And the reference in this case is meant in a general sense, in a summary way, without dividing out the individual components.


[3927]
PHUNG PO LNGA PO DE RNAMS DE YI RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PAS STONG PA NYID GANG YIN PA DE NI, DNGOS PO STONG PA NYID DU MDOR BSHAD DO,,

And then that fact that these five parts to the person are empty of existing through any nature of their own is, in brief, what we refer to as “the emptiness of things.”


	[3928]
[VI.220]
Abhāvo’saṃskṛtā dharmā nirdiśyante samāsataḥ,
Tenābhāvena śūnyatvaṃ tasyaivābhāva śūnyatā.

,MDOR BSDUS NA NI DNGOS MED PA,
,’DUS MA BYAS CHOS RNAMS LA BRJOD,
,DE NYID [215a] DNGOS MED DES STONG NYID,
,DNGOS PO MED PA STONG NYID DO,

		This lack of things,
		In summary,
		Refers to entities

		That are things
		Which exist but
		Were not produced [f. 215a].

		The fact that these
		Same absences of things
		Are empty is

		The emptiness of
		The lack of things.


[3929]
SO SOR MA PHYE BAR MDOR BSDUS NA NI DNGOS PO MED PA NI ‘DUS MA BYAS NAM MKHA’ LA SOGS PA DANG MYANG ‘DAS RNAMS LA BRJOD DO,,

The lack of things in summary, without dividing out the individual components, refers to empty space and the rest, and nirvana—things which exist but were not produced.


[3930]
‘DUS MA BYAS DE NYID DNGOS POR MED PA DE’I RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB [f. 261a] PAS STONG PA NYID NI, DNGOS PO MED PA STONG PA NYID DO ZHES BYA’O,,

And then when we speak of the fact that these same unproduced, existent phenomena—these absences of things—are empty of existing through any nature of their own, that is what we call “the emptiness of the lack of things.”


	[3931]
[VI.221]
Prakṛter niḥsvabhāvatvaṃ svabhāvākhyā tu śūnyatā,
Prakṛtir na kṛtetyevaṃ svabhāva iti kathyate.

,RANG BZHIN NGO BO NYID MED NI,
,RANG BZHIN ZHES BYA’I STONG NYID DE,
,’DI LTAR RANG BZHIN MA BYAS PAS,
,RANG BZHIN ZHES NI BYA BAR BSNYAD,

		What we give
		The name of
		“The emptiness
		Of any nature”

		Is an absence
		Of any real quality
		To the nature.

		This particular nature
		Is not something produced;

		As such we give it the
		Name of “the nature.”


[3932]
RANG BZHIN NI CHOS NYID KYI RANG BZHIN LA BYA STE, ‘DI LTAR RANG BZHIN DE NI NYAN THOS LA SOGS PAS MA BYAS PAR DNGOS PO’I GSHIS LUGS SU GNAS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

“The nature” here refers to the nature of the way of all things; and that’s because this particular nature is not something that the listeners and the like have ever produced—it simply remains, as the original nature of things.


[3933]
RANG BZHIN CHOS NYID DE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA NI RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID DO ZHES BYA BAR BSNYAD DO,,

This nature or way of all things is an absence of things existing through any nature of their own; as such, we give it the name of “the emptiness of any nature.”


	[3934]
[VI.222]
Utpāde’pi hi Buddhānām anutpāde’pi bhāvataḥ,
Śūnyatā sarva bhāvānāṃ paro bhāvaḥ prakīrtitaḥ.

,SANGS RGYAS RNAMS NI ‘BYUNG BA’AM,
,MA BYUNG YANG RUNG DNGOS SU NI,
,DNGOS PO KUN GYI STONG PA NYID,
,GZHAN GYI DNGOS POR RAB TU BSGRAGS,

		Whether the Buddhas
		Ever occur
		Or do not appear,
		It’s all the same.

		All entities will possess
		An emptiness, really;

		This is what we declare
		Is the emptiness
		Of being other things.


[3935]
SANGS RGYAS RNAMS NI BYUNG BA’AM STE ‘JIG RTEN DU ‘BYUNG YANG RUNG, MA BYUNG YANG RUNG STE DNGOS PO KUN GYI RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID NI, GZHAN GYI DNGOS PO STE NGO BOR RAB TU BSGRAGS SO,,

“Whether the Buddhas ever occur”—which is to say, whether they appear in this world, or do not appear in this world—it’s all the same.  Still, in either case, all entities will possess an emptiness of any nature of their own; and this is what we declare is the “emptiness of being other things,” or essential natures.


[3936]
‘DIR NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, MA BYUNG YANG NI RANG BZHIN NYID, CES PA DANG, GZHAN GYI NGO BO STONG PAR BSGRAGS, ZHES ‘BYUNG BA LTAR BDE’O,,

Here we find the wording of Nakto’s translation to be more convenient: “the very nature of things, even if they don’t appear,” and “what we declare as the emptiness of being other essences.”


[3937]
GZHAN GYI NGO BO’I SKAD DOD NI MCHOG DANG GZHAN DANG PHA ROL GSUM LA ‘JUG PAS, DANG PO LTAR NA MCHOG TU BYUNG BA’I DE KHO NA NYID DO,,

The original Sanskrit wording for “other essences” here can apply to three different things: to “the highest”; to “something other”; and to “the other side.”  If we take it the first way, then we can read it as “suchness which appears as the highest.”


[3938]
MCHOG TU BYUNG BA’I DON NI RTAG TU DE KHO NA NYID KYI MTSAN NYID LAS MI ‘DA’ BAR YOD PA’O,,

What “appears as the highest” implies here is that things always exist without going beyond the quality of suchness.


[3939]
GNYIS PA LTAR NA GZHAN NI ‘JIG RTEN PA LAS GZHAN ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I YE SHES PHUL DU BYUNG BA RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I YE SHES SO,,

If we follow the second connotation here, then the “something other” is “other than something of the world.”  And this would refer to the form of wisdom which is beyond the world—a form which is excellent, and no longer imagines things in a mistaken way.


[3940]
DNGOS PO STE NGO BO NI YE SHES DES RTOGS PAR BYA BA’O,,

When it says “thing” here it refers to the essential nature which is what this wisdom realizes.


[3941]
GSUM PA LTAR NA PHA ROL NA YOD PA NI GZHAN GYI NGO BO’O,,

Following the third connotation, “existing on the far side” is a reference to the essential nature of other things.


	[3942]
[VI.223]
Bhūtakoṭis tathātvaṃ ca sā parabhāva śūnyatā,
Prajñā pāramitānītāvityetāḥ saṃprakīrtitāḥ.

,YANG DAG MTHA’ DANG DE BZHIN NYID,
,DE BZHIN DNGOS PO’I STONG NYID DO,,
,SHES RAB PHA ROL PHYIN TSUL LAS,
,DE DAG DE SKAD RAB TU BSGRAGS,

		The ultimate end
		And, just so,
The true nature,

Are the emptiness
Of things.

This is how
They were declared
In those words

Presented in
The way of the
Perfection of wisdom.


[3943]
DE YANG ‘KHOR BA LAS ‘DAS PA’I PHYIR ‘KHOR BA’I PHA ROL NI YANG DAG PA’I MTHA’ STE MTHA’ NI ‘DIR ‘KHOR BA ZAD PA’I MYANG ‘DAS SO,,

And now since it is beyond the circle of suffering, we refer to the “far side” of this circle as “the ultimate end.”  Here, “end” refers to the nirvana in which we have finished off this circle of pain.


[3944]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI MTSAN NYID LAS RNAM PA GZHAN DU ‘GYUR BA MED PAS DE BZHIN NYID [f. 261b] DO,,

And we use the expression “the true nature” to indicate something that never displays any changing to something other type: other than the nature of suchness.


[3945]
DE NYID NI DE NYID KYI RANG BZHIN GYIS STONG PA’I MTSAN NYID CAN GYI STONG PA NYID DE NI, GZHAN GYI DNGOS PO STE NGO BO’I STONG PA NYID CES BYA’O,,

This in itself is an emptiness which has an own nature of being empty of any nature of its very own; and so we speak of the “emptiness” of other things, or essential nature.


[3946]
RANG BZHIN STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA SNGAR BSHAD KYANG ‘DIR BSHAD PA MI ZLOS PA NI, ‘DIR DBYE SGO ‘BRING PO’I DBANG DU MDZAD PA’O,,

Now we have, previously, already given an explanation of things like “the emptiness of a nature of its own.”  The reason why what we have here is not redundant is with reference to the degree of division which we have here, which is middling in extent.


[3947]
BSHAD PA PHYI MA GNYIS RGYAS ‘BRING GNYIS KA’I SKABS SU YANG YANG ‘BYUNG BA NI, CHOS NYID DE DNGOS PO’I GSHIS YIN PA DANG, RTAG TU YOD PA DANG, MI RTOG YE SHES KYI GZHAL BYAR YOD PAR KHAS LEN NA BDEN PAR GRUB BO SNYAM PA’I DOGS PA GCAD PA’I DON YIN PAS DE RNAMS MI ‘GAL BAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

Now why do the latter two explanations occur over & over again in the context of both the more extensive and the middling versions?  This is because we accept that the true nature of things is their original nature; and that it exists for all time; and that it exists as that object which the wisdom beyond any mistaken perception holds under its consideration.  As such, the intent here is to prevent any mistaken idea where people think that perhaps it exists in truth.  You should understand then that we have no contradiction here.


[3948]
DE ‘DRA BA’I STONG PA NYID DE DAG NI SHES RAB KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I TSUL RGYAL BA’I YUM LAS DBYE BA DANG STONG TSUL DE DAG ‘DIR BSHAD PA DE SKAD DU RAB TU BSGRAGS PA STE BSHAD DO,,

These types of emptiness then represent the divisions, and the manner in which things are empty, as the way of the perfection of wisdom is presented in the sutras of the Mother of the Victors.  We have explained them then here according to how they were declared in those words.



A concluding summary
describing the high qualities

[3949]
BZHI PA NI,

With this we have reached our fourth very general division from above: a concluding summary for the section, by way of describing the high qualities of this level.


[3950]
DA NI SHER PHYIN LA LHAG PAR MOS PA’I BYANG SEMS KYI THUN MONG MA YIN PA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS, SHER PHYIN GYI SKABS RDZOGS PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU BSHAD PA,

And so we will now make an explanation with a view towards wrapping up our section on the perfection of wisdom, by describing the unique personal qualities of a bodhisattva who has a special longing for this wisdom perfection.


	[3951]
[VI.224]
Iti matikiraṇa sphuṭāvabhāsaḥ
svakaragatāmalakaṃ yathaiva buddhvā,
Tribhavam idam aśeṣam ādyajātaṃ
vyavahṛtisatyavaśān nirodham eti.

,DE LTAR BLO GROS ZER GYIS SNANG BA
GSAL BYAS PA,
,RANG GI LAG NA GNAS PA’I SKYU RU
RA BZHIN DU,
,SRID GSUM ‘DI DAG MA LUS GDOD NAS
SKYE MED PAR,
,RTOGS TE THA SNYAD BDEN PA’I STOBS KYIS
‘GOG PAR ‘GRO,

		The wisdom
		From this represents
		Rays of light
		That illuminate;

		We could compare it
		To an olive
		Sitting in the palm
		Of they themselves.

		Suppose we are able
		To realize that
		There is nothing about

		The entirety
		Of these three realms
		Of existence which

		Has ever started,
		Since time with
		No beginning.

		Through the power
		Of nominal reality,
		We come to the point
		Where things are stopped.


[3952]
SNGAR BSHAD PA’I RNAM PA DE LTAR RNAM PAR DPYAD PA LAS BYUNG BA’I BLO GROS KYI ‘OD ZER GYIS DE KHO NA NYID MTHONG BA LA GEGS BYED PA’I MUN PA ‘JOMS PA’I SNANG BA GSAL BAR BYAS PA’I BYANG SEMS RANG GI LAG NA GNAS PA’I SKYU RU RA RLON PA’I ‘BRAS BU BZHIN DU,

Let us consider then the wisdom that comes from this kind of careful examination of all the different aspects we’ve described in the discussions up to this point.  This wisdom represents rays of light that illuminate the darkness which acts to block us from seeing suchness.  It lights things up so well that we could compare it to the fresh fruit of an olive sitting in the palm of the bodhisattva themselves, seen by them this clearly.


[3953]
SRID PA GSUM PO ‘DI DAG MA LUS PA GDOD MA NAS RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PAR MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA DE YANG NI, THA SNYAD PA KUN RDZOB BDEN PA’I STOBS KYIS TE KUN RDZOB TU ‘GOG PAR ‘GRO BA STE DE LA [f. 262a] SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG GO

And so suppose that we are able to realize, directly, that there is nothing about the entirety of these three realms of existence which has ever started through any nature of its own: and it has been this way since time with no beginning.  And in this case, we have—through the power of nominal, or deceptive reality—come to the point where things are stopped, in a nominal sense.  And then we go into a balanced meditation on this very point.


	[3954]
[VI.225]
Janayati karuṇāṃ jagatyanāthe
bhavati nirodha gatāśayaḥ sadaiṣaḥ,
Jayati ca sakalān dhiyāta ūrdhvaṃ
Sugatavacaḥ prabhavāt sa madhyabuddhān.

,RTAG TU ‘GOG PAR GTOGS PA’I BSAM GTAN
YIN MOD KYI,
,’GRO BA MGON MED PA LA SNYING RJE’ANG
SKYED PAR BYED,
,DE GONG BDE GSHEGS GSUNG SKYES SANGS RGYAS
‘BRING BCAS NI,
,MA LUS PA RNAMS BLO YIS PHAM PAR
BYED PA’ANG YIN,

		It is admittedly
		The case that
		They always have
		
		A state of mental focus
		Which is taken in
		By a cessation;

		And yet
		At the same time
		They give rise to
		
		Thoughts of compassion
		Towards living beings,

		Who have no one
		To protect them.

		Beyond that,
		They defeat,
		In their mind,

		All of those
		Individuals who are

		Born of the word
		Of Those Gone to Bliss,
		And medium buddhas.


[3955]
,’GOG PA’I NGO BOR SON KYANG ‘GRO BA SKYOB PA’I BSAM PA ‘DOR BA YANG MA YIN NO ZHES BSHAD PA,

Here we will explain the idea that “Even though one has passed into the essence of cessation, it is not that at the same time they give up thoughts of protecting.”


[3956]
BYANG SEMS SA DRUG PA BA DE RTAG TU ‘GOG PA ‘OD GSAL DU GTOGS PA’I BSAM PA DANG LDAN PA YIN MOD KYI, ‘GRO BA MGON MED PA RNAMS LA ‘DI YI SNYING RJE’ANG SKYED PAR BYED PA STE ‘PHEL BAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Now it is admittedly the case that a bodhisattva at the sixth level is always possessed of a state of mind which is taken in by a cessation: by the clear light.  And yet at the same time they “give rise to”—which is to say, increase—their thoughts of compassion towards living beings, who have no one to protect them.


[3957]
DE’I PHYIR ‘DI’I SBYOR BA NI ‘KHOR BAR GTOGS PA DANG, BSAM PA NI MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PAR GTOGS SO,,

As such, we can say that the activities of such individuals are taken in by the cycle of pain; while their state of mind is taken in by nirvana.


[3958]
SA DRUG PA BA ‘DIS SA DRUG PA DE’I GONG DU STE PHYI NAS BDER GSHEGS GSUNG SKYES NYAN THOS RNAMS SANGS RGYAS ‘BRING PO RANG RGYAL DANG BCAS PA MA LUS PA RNAMS NI BLO YI STOBS KYIS PHAM PAR BYED PA STE ZIL GYIS GNON PA’ANG YIN NO,,

This person at the sixth bodhisattva level is also someone who “beyond that,” meaning later on, “defeats”—which is to say, outshines—in the power of their mind all of those individuals who are “born of the word of Those Gone To Bliss” (a reference to the listeners) and “medium buddhas” (self-made victors).


	[3959]
[VI.226]
Jina guṇa jaladheḥ paraṃ sa pāraṃ 
vrajati puraskṛta eṣa janmi haṃsaiḥ,
Śubha pavana balena rāja haṃsaḥ
pṛthu sita saṃvṛti tattva jāta pakṣaḥ.

,KUN RDZOB DE NYID GSHOG YANGS DKAR PO
RGYAS GYUR PA,
,NGANG PA’I RGYAL PO DE NI SKYE BO’I
NGANG PA YIS,
,MDUN DU BDAR NAS DGE BA’I RLUNG GI
SHUGS STOBS KYIS,
,RGYAL BA’I YON TAN RGYA MTSO’I PHA ROL
MCHOG TU ‘GRO,,

They are able
To stretch forth

Their broad, white,
Wide-spreading wings,

Of the deceptive
Side of things,
And suchness.

They are kings
Among the birds,

Soaring at the head
Of the geese
Of living beings.

By the strength
And power
Of good deeds,

They fly
To the highest:

To the far shores
Of the ocean of
The high qualities
Of the Victors.


[3960]
KUN RDZOB RGYA CHE BA’I LAM GYI RIM PA DANG, DE KHO NA NYID ZAB MO’I LAM GYI RIM PA’I G-YAS G-YON GYI GSHOG PA YANGS PA DKAR PO RGYAS PAR GYUR PA’I NGANG PA’I RGYAL PO SA DRUG PA BA DE NI, GDUL BYA’I SKYE BO’I NGANG PA PHUL DU BYUNG BA SKYED PA RNAMS KYIS MDUN DU BDAR NAS,

These bodhisattvas of the sixth level are able to stretch forth their broad, white, wide-spreading right and left wings—a reference to their practice of the deceptive side of things, the wide-spreading path; and their practice of sheer suchness, the path of the profound.  As such, they are like kings among the birds, soaring at the head of the geese of living beings—their disciples—whom they have created as exceptional.


[3961]
SNGON LAN MANG DU BSAGS PA’I DGE BA’I RLUNG GI SHUGS CHEN PO’I STOBS KYIS, RGYAL BA SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN GYI RGYA MTSO CHEN PO’I PHA ROL MCHOG TU ‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR BAS,

They are driven by the strength, by the great power, of the wind of the good deeds that they have, on many previous occasions, gathered together.  And with this power they are able to fly to the “highest”—to the far shores of the great ocean of the high qualities of the Victors: the Buddhas.


[3962]
DE’I RJES SU SLOB PAR ‘DOD PA RNAMS KYIS KYANG LAM RIM PA GNYIS KA’I GSHOG PAS BGROD DGOS KYI, GSHOG PA GNYIS GANG YANG MED PA DANG, PHYOGS RE BA’I LAM GSHOG PA GCIG CHAG PA LTA BUS MI TSIM PAR,

As such, those who hope to follow in their wake and learn these things must make the journey using the strong wings of both of these variations of the steps of the path.  You should not be satisfied with possessing neither of these wings; and neither should you be satisfied with a path which is only partial: where it is as if you were born with but a single wing.


[3963]
THABS DANG SHES RAB GNYIS KA [f. 262b] TSANG BA’I LAM GYIS SANGS RGYAS KYI SAR BGROD PAR BYA’O,,

That is, it is only by employing the complete path—one which includes both method and wisdom—that we will be able to make the journey to the level of an Enlightened Being.


	[3964]
[chapter number]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS SEMS BSKYED PA DRUG PA’O,,

This concludes the sixth wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.


[3965]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA DRUG PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

This then concludes the explanation of the sixth ultimate “Wish for Enlightenment”—or chapter—in An Illumination of the True Intent, an extensive commentary to Entering the Middle Way.



Chapter 7
The Final Four Levels
 


Chapter 7
The Final Four Levels


The seventh level

[3966]
` ,,GSUM PA RING DU SONG BA SOGS BZHI BSHAD PA LA BZHI, SA BDUN PA DANG, SA BRGYAD PA DANG, SA DGU PA DANG, SA BCU PA BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to a third great section of our work, which is our explanation of the four levels including the one named “Gone Far,” and the rest.  Here there are four sections: an explanation of the seventh bodhisattva level; and then the eighth; and the ninth; and finally the tenth.  Here is the first of those.


	[3967]
[VII.1]
	Sanskrit unavailable

,RING DU SONG ‘DIR ‘DI NI SKAD CIG DANG,
,SKAD CIG LA NI ‘GOG PAR ‘JUG ‘BYUNG ZHING,
,THABS KYI PHA ROL PHYIN LEGS ‘BAR BA’ANG ‘THOB,

		Here at “Gone Far,”
		This one is in meditation,
		From moment to moment,
		On cessation.

		Further, they also attain
A perfection of skillful means
		Which is blazing strongly.	


[3968]
SA BDUN PA RING DU SONG BA ‘DIR NI, SA DRUG PAR THOB PA’I ‘GOG PA DE LA SKAD CIG DANG, SKAD CIG STE SKAD CIG RE RE LA BYANG SEMS ‘DI SNYOM PAR ‘JUG PAR ‘GYUR TE,

Here at the seventh level, known as “Gone Far,” this bodhisattva remains in balanced meditation, from moment to moment—in each separate moment, upon the cessation that they attained at the sixth level.


[3969]
‘GOG PA LA ‘JUG PA NI YANG DAG PA’I MTHA’ LA SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG PA YIN PAS, DE BZHIN NYID LA ‘GOG PA ZHES BRJOD DE, ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG GI SKABS SU DE BZHIN NYID ‘DIR GNYIS SNANG GI SPROS PA THAMS CAD ‘GOG PAR ‘GYUR BA’I PHYIR RO,,

And because this engagement in the cessation is a balanced meditation upon the ultimate end, we refer to it as “cessation in the way things really are.”  And that, in turn, is because here in the very nature of things at the point of the balanced meditation of a realized being, all elaborations of duality are stopped.


[3970]
DE SKAD DU SA BCU PA LAS, KYE RGYAL BA’I SRAS DAG BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SA DRUG PA YAN CHAD, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I ‘GOG PA LA SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG PA STE, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SA BDUN PA ‘DI LA GNAS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ NI, SEMS KYI SKAD CIG SEMS KYI SKAD CIG LA YANG ‘GOG PA LA SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG CING LDANG STE, ‘GOG PA MNGON SUM DU BYAS ZHES NI MI BYA’O ZHES RGYAS PAR GSUNGS SO,,

We see this described, in some detail, in The Sutra on the Ten Levels:

O children of the Victors, beyond the sixth level of the bodhisattva, one goes into a balanced meditation upon the cessation of a bodhisattva.  That is, a bodhisattva who is staying at the seventh bodhisattva level enters into balanced meditation upon—and then arises from—their cessation, moment by mental moment.  We do not though refer to this as having gone directly into the cessation.


[3971]
SA ‘DIR THABS MKHAS KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA LEGS PAR ‘BAR BA STE CHES YONGS SU DAG PAR YANG ‘GYUR TE, DAG TSUL NI SNGAR SA GZHAN LA BSTAN PA’I RIGS PAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

At this level, the perfection of skillful means is blazing strongly; that is, it has further become ever more absolutely pure.  The exact manner in which it is pure is something you can understand from the reasoning we presented earlier for the other levels.


[3972]
SHER PHYIN NYID RNAM PA KHYAD PAR [f. 263a] CAN DU ZHUGS PA LA PHAR PHYIN PHYI MA BZHIR BZHAG GO

When one is engaged in an exceptional form of this very perfection of wisdom, we posit it as being the four latter forms of the perfections.


[3973]
,CHOS RAB TU RNAM PAR ‘BYED PA’I GNAS SKABS NYID NI SHER PHYIN ZHES BRJOD KYI RNAM PA GZHAN NI MA YIN NO,,

This point at which we are engaged in an extraordinary level of the discernment of entities is what we refer to as the “perfection of wisdom”; and it is no other way.


[3974]
THABS MKHAS KYI PHAR PHYIN DU ‘JOG PA’I THABS LA MKHAS PA NI BYANG SA LAS, DRUG TSAN GNYIS GSUNGS PA’I DANG PO NANG GI SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS ‘GRUB PA LAS BRTZAMS PA’I THABS MKHAS PA DRUG NI,

The kind of skillful means which we establish as the perfection of skillful means is described in Levels of the Bodhisattva.  Here we find described two sets of six.  The first set is composed of the six forms of skillful means which start off from ones inner practice of the teachings of the Buddha.


[3975]
BYANG SEMS KYIS SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LA SNYING RJE DANG LDAN PAR LTA BA DANG, ‘DU BYED THAMS CAD KYI RANG BZHIN YANG DAG PA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU SHES PA DANG, BLA NA MED PA’I BYANG CHUB KYI YE SHES ‘DOD PA DANG, SEMS CAN LA LTA BA LA BRTEN NAS ‘KHOR BA MI GTONG BA DANG, ‘DU BYED JI LTA BA BZHIN SHES PA LA BRTEN NAS NYON MONGS PA CAN MA YIN PA’I SEMS KYIS ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHOR BA DANG, SANGS RGYAS ‘DOD PA LA BRTEN NAS BRTZON ‘GRUS ‘BAR BA’O,,

Here we have—

(1) The way that bodhisattvas view each and every living being with compassion;

(2) The way in which they comprehend the nature of all factors as pure, exactly as it is;

(3) The way in which they aspire to the wisdom of matchless enlightenment;

(4) The way in which they refuse to abandon the circle of suffering, so far as how they look upon living beings;

(5) The way in which they circle in the circle of suffering, with a mind that is free of negative emotions, all depending upon their understanding of the way that factors really are; and

(6) The way in which they set on fire the efforts they make, all due to their yearning towards enlightenment.


[3976]
PHYI’I SEMS CAN SMIN PAR BYA BA LAS BRTZAMS PA’I THABS MKHAS DRUG NI,

And then there is the second set of six types of skillful means, which are undertaken towards working to ripen the outside objects, of living beings. 


[3977]
BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYIS SEMS CAN GYI DGE BA’I RTZA BA CHUNG NGU RNAMS ‘BRAS BU TSAD MED PAR SGYUR BAR BYED PA DANG, DE BZHIN DU TSOGS CHUNG NGUS DGE RTZA CHE BA DAG SGRUB PAR BYED PA DANG, BSTAN PA LA ZHE ‘GRAS PA RNAMS KYI KHONG KHRO SEL BAR BYED PA DANG, BSTAN PA LA YID BAR MAR GNAS PA RNAMS DE LA ‘DZUD PA DANG, ZHUGS PA RNAMS SMIN PAR BYED PA DANG, SMIN PA RNAMS GROL BAR BYED PA STE 

These six then are the following:

(7) The way in which bodhisattvas take the more minor roots of virtue which living beings possess, and transform them into limitless results; and, just so,

(8) The way they act to accomplish massive roots of virtue out of minor collections of goodness;

(9) The way in which they manage to clear away the anger of those who feel some hatred towards the teachings;

(10) The way they induce those who are feeling divided about the teachings to enter those teachings;

(11) The way they act to ripen those who have already entered the teachings; and

(12) They way they act to liberate those who are ripened.


[3978]
THABS LA MKHAS PA BCU GNYIS SO,,

These then are the twelve forms of skillful means.


	[3979]
[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA BDUN PA’O,,

This concludes the seventh wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.


[3980]
DBU MA LA [f. 263b] ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA BDUN PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

This then concludes the explanation of the seventh ultimate “Wish for Enlightenment”—or chapter—in An Illumination of the True Intent, an extensive commentary to Entering the Middle Way.



Special prayers,
and rising from cessation

[3981]
` ,,GNYIS PA LA GSUM, SA ‘DIR SMON LAM LHAG CING ‘GOG PA LAS SLONG TSUL, NYON MONGS THAMS CAD ZAD PAR BSTAN PA, DBANG BCU THOB PAR BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

With this we have reached our second section from above: an explanation of the eighth bodhisattva level.  We proceed in three parts: a description of how, at this level, ones prayers are special, and how they rise out of their cessation; a description of how they finish off all their negative emotions; and a description of how they attain the ten powers.


	[3982]
	[VIII.1]
	Sanskrit unavailable

,YANG YANG SNGAR DGE LAS LHAG THOB BYA’I PHYIR,
,GANG DU PHYIR MI LDOG PA NYID ‘GYUR BA,
,MI G-YO DE LA BDAG NYID CHE DE ‘JUG
,’DI YI SMON LAM SHIN TU DAG ‘GYUR ZHING,
,RGYAL BA RNAMS KYIS ‘GOG LAS SLONG BAR MDZAD,

		They seek,
		Again and again,

		To achieve an even
		Higher degree
		Of virtue.

		These great beings
Enter “Unmoving”;

This is where
They can absolutely
Never turn back,

And special prayers
Made by them
Reach an extraordinary
Level of purity,

		While the Victors
		Undertake to
		Rouse them from
		The cessation.


[3983]
BYANG SEMS SA BDUN PA BA DE NI YANG DANG YANG DU SNGAR GYI DGE BA LAS LHAG PA THOB PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU, SA GANG DU BYANG SEMS DE PHYIR MI LDOG PA NYID DU ‘GYUR BAS BRGYAD PA MI G-YO BA DE LA, BYANG SEMS BDAG NYID CHEN PO DE ‘JUG GO

This bodhisattva at the seventh level seeks, again and again, to achieve an even higher degree of virtue than what they had reached before.  And so it is that these great beings—these particular bodhisattvas—enter the eighth level, Unmoving; so called because this is the level at which the bodhisattva can absolutely never turn back.


[3984]
,DE LA YANG DANG YANG DU SNGAR SA BDUN PA MAN CHAD KYI DGE BA LAS LHAG PA THOB LUGS NI,

Now just how is it that these practitioners continue, over and over again, to attain virtue which is even higher than that they reached earlier, at the seventh level on down?


[3985]
SA BCU PA LAS, KYE RGYAL BA’I SRAS ‘DI LTA STE, DPER NA RGYA MTSO CHEN POR ‘GRO BA’I GRU BO CHE NI, RGYA MTSO CHEN PO LA MA THUG GI BAR DU CHED DU BSKYOD CING ‘GRO BAR BYA BA YIN TE, GANG GI TSE RGYA MTSO CHEN PO LA PHYIN MA THAG TU RLUNG GI DKYIL ‘KHOR GYIS BSKYOD NAS, CHED DU BSKYOD MI DGOS PAR ‘GRO STE, DES RGYA MTSO CHEN PO LA NYIN GCIG CHOD PA DE NI SNGON CHED DU BSKYOD CING ‘GRO BAS, LO BRGYAR YANG DE SRID DU TSAD MED PAR PHYIN PAR MI NUS SO,,

The Sutra on the Ten Levels puts it this way:

O child of the Victors, this is the way it is.  Think for example of a great ship bound for the great sea.  It continues its journey with purpose, moving on until it reaches this massive body of water.

And then suppose that, just after it has reached that greater sea, it is struck by a hurricane.  No longer do the sailors have to make any conscious effort to advance the ship; it moves across the great sea making more progress in a single day than it had made in all their sailing up to that point.  Not even in a hundred years would they have been able to move that far, beyond all limits.


[3986]
KYE RGYAL BA’I SRAS DE BZHIN DU BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ DGE BA’I RTZA BA’I TSOGS SHIN TU BSAGS PA, THEG PA CHEN PO YANG DAG PAR BSGRUB PA YANG, BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SPYOD PA’I RGYA MTSOR PHYIN NAS LHUN GYIS GRUB PA’I YE SHES KYIS YUD TZAM ZHIG LA, THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES JI TZAM GNON PA DE NI, SNGON GYI CHED DU BYA [f. 264a] BA’I LAS KYIS BSKAL PA ‘BUM DU YANG, DE SNYED DU DPAG TU MED PA GNON PAR MI NUS SO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

And it is the same, o monks, with those bodhisattvas who have made a massive collection of the roots of virtue, and who have practiced the greater way perfectly.  Once they have come to the ocean of the deeds of the bodhisattvas, then spontaneous wisdom starts to have its effect on them, in even but a single moment, during which they are set upon by the wisdom of omniscience.  And they reach a place that they had never arrived at, even after a hundred thousand eons of concerted effort.  They could never have reached this place even with countless periods of trying, for that same amount of time.


[3987]
DE LA RGYA MTSOR MA PHYIN PA’I BAR NI SA BDUN PA MAN CHAD KYI DPE’O,,

In this metaphor, the time it takes just to reach the great ocean represents the period from the seventh bodhisattva level on down.


[3988]
RGYA MTSOR ZHUGS NAS ‘GRO BA NI SA BRGYAD PA THOB NAS LAM BGROD PA’I DPE’O,,

Finally entering and then traveling upon this ocean represents our journey along the path once we have attained the eighth bodhisattva level.


[3989]
SA BRGYAD PA BA ‘DI YI SMON LAM SNGON ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I SEMS DANG PO BSKYED PA NA, SMON LAM CHEN PO BCU LA SOGS PA’I SMON LAM ‘BUM PHRAG GRANGS MED PA PHRAG BCU BTAB PA DE DAG ,SA ‘DI LA SHIN TU DAG PA STE SMON LAM GYI PHAR PHYIN SA ‘DIR CHES LHAG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

There are special prayers that are made by this bodhisattva who is on the eighth level.  Back when they first gave rise to the state of mind beyond the world, they made ten groups of innumerable prayers, the groups themselves numbering in turn a hundred thousand.  At this level then, these prayers reach an extraordinary level of purity; and so here they attain an especially extraordinary level of the perfection of prayer.


[3990]
SA ‘DI NI GZHON NU’I SAR GZHAG STE, DGU PAR RGYAL TSAB ‘THOB LA, BCU PAR NI ‘KHOR LOS SGYUR BA LTAR RGYAL BA RNAMS KYIS DBANG BSKUR RO,,

This particular bodhisattva level is considered a “level of the youth.”  At the ninth level, the bodhisattva attains the status of a regent to the crown; and then at the tenth level they are finally invested with the full authority of a Wheel Emperor.


[3991]
SA MI G-YO BAR ‘GOG PA CHOS NYID LA ZHUGS PA NA, RGYAL BA RNAMS KYIS ‘GOG PA LA ZHUGS PA DE LAS SLONG BAR YANG MDZAD DE,

When these bodhisattvas have entered into cessation, true nature, at the level of Unmoving, the Victors further undertake to rouse them from the cessation entered into.


[3992]
SA BCU PA LAS, KYE RGYAL BA’I SRAS DAG DE LTAR BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I SA MI G-YO BA ‘DI LA GNAS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ SNGON GYI SMON LAM GYI STOBS BSKYED PA DANG, CHOS KYI SGO’I RGYUN DE LA GNAS PA DE LA SANGS RGYAS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS RNAMS DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I YE SHES NYE BAR SGRUB PAR MDZAD DE, DE LA ‘DI SKAD CES KYANG BKA’ STZAL TO,,

The Sutra on the Ten Levels puts it this way:

Consider again, o children of the Victors, those bodhisattvas who are situated in this way, at the bodhisattva level known as “Unmoving.”  They raise the force of the prayers they had made earlier, and remain there in the flow of the entrance of the Dharma.  And then they go further and come to achieving the wisdom of the Buddhas, the Conquerors—those who have Gone That Way.  And then they are spoken to, in the following high words.


[3993]
RIGS KYI BU LEGS SO LEGS SO, ,SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS RJES SU RTOGS PAR BYA BA LA ‘DI NI DON DAM PA’I BZOD PA YANG YIN NO,

O child of noble family, it is excellent, excellent.  What you are undertaking is ultimate perseverance in coming to a full realization of the Dharma of the Buddhas.


[3994]
‘ON KYANG RIGS KYI BU GANG NGED KYI STOBS BCU DANG, MI ‘JIGS PA BZHI LA SOGS [f. 264b] PA SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS MA ‘DRES PA PHUN SUM TSOGS PA DE KHYOD LA MED KYI, SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS PHUN SUM TSOGS PA DE YONGS SU BTZAL BA’I PHYIR SBYOR BA BYOS SHIG ,BRTZON ‘GRUS RTZOMS SHIG ,BZOD PA’I SGO ‘DI NYID KYANG MA ‘DOR CIG

And yet, o child of noble family, as yet you still do not possess the ten forces that I possess, and my four types of fearlessness, and all the other of the excellent, unadmixed qualities of a Buddha.  As such, I urge you now to apply yourself in the pursuit of the totally excellent qualities of an Enlightened Being.  Gird yourself in your efforts.  And never abandon this particular doorway of forbearance.


[3995]
,RIGS KYI BU KHYOD KYIS DE LTAR ZHI BA’I RNAM PAR THAR PA LA GNAS PA THOB KYANG, BYIS PA SO SO’I SKYE BO MA ZHI BA RAB TU MA ZHIG {%ZHI} BA, NYON MONGS PA SNA TSOGS KUN TU BYUNG BAR GYUR PA, RNAM PAR RTOG PA SNA TSOGS KYIS YID G-YON SPYO BA ‘DI DAG LA SOMS SHIG

O child of noble family, it may well be the case that you are residing in the freedom of peace.  And yet I urge you to turn your thoughts to the infants, the common beings, who have no peace—who have no peace at all.  They are still plagued by a whole variety of different negativities; and their thoughts are still corrupted by a whole variety of imaginings.


[3996]
,GZHAN YANG RIGS KYI BU SNGON GYI SMON LAM DANG, SEMS CAN GYI DON THOB PAR BYA BA DANG, YE SHES KYI SGO BSAM GYIS MI KHYAB PA DRAN PAR GYIS SHIG

Moreover, o child of noble family, I urge you never to forget the prayers you have made in times gone by; and your duty to accomplish the goals of living beings; and the inconceivable doors of wisdom.


[3997]
,YANG RIGS KYI BU ‘DI NI CHOS RNAMS KYI CHOS NYID DO, ,DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS BYUNG YANG RUNG MA BYUNG YANG RUNG CHOS KYI DBYINGS ‘DI NI GNAS PA NYID DO, ‘DI LTAR CHOS THAMS CAD STONG PA NYID DANG, CHOS THAMS CAD DMIGS SU MED PA’O,,

And I remind you, o child of noble family, that this is the true nature of all existing things.  Whether Buddhas ever appeared in this universe, or failed to appear, this realm of all things is pure reality, itself.  Which is to say, each and every existing entity is emptiness; and nothing in the entire universe is to be found here.


[3998]
‘DIS NI DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA RNAMS NYI TSE RAB TU DBYE BAR BYA BA MA YIN GYI, NYAN THOS DANG RANG SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD KYIS KYANG RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I CHOS NYID ‘DI ‘THOB BO, ZHES DANG,

And this is not some outline of things which is partial; that is, which fits only Those Who Have Gone That Way.  Rather, we can say that all of them—including the listeners and the self-made Buddhas—come to an attainment of this true nature of things, beyond all thought.


[3999]
GAL TE SANGS RGYAS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS DE DAG GIS BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ DE LA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES MNGON PAR SGRUB PA’I SGO RNAMS SU GZHUG PA MA MDZAD DU ZIN NA, DE DE NYID KYI TSE YONGS SU MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ BAR ‘GYUR TE, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON BYA BA YANG [f. 265a] RGYUN CHAD PAR ‘GYUR RO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And then we have—

If it were the case that the Buddhas, the Conquerors, were to fail to set the bodhisattva to entering the doorways where they could finally achieve the wisdom of omniscience, then at that very point they would instead pass into nirvana.  And then the flow of their efforts to accomplish the needs of every living being would be cut off.


[4000]
DE DAG GIS NI SA BRGYAD PAR RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I YE SHES LA DBANG SGYUR THOB NAS, DE TZAM LA MNYAM PAR BZHAG PA NA, DE LAS BSLANG NAS SANGS RGYAS KYI STOBS LA SOGS PA THOB PA’I RGYUR RJES THOB TU TSOGS GSOG PA LA BSKUL ZHING,

What this is describing is a point at which we have gained mastery over the wisdom, at the eighth bodhisattva level, where we are no longer imagining any self-existence.  If we are in a balanced meditation on nothing more than this, then when we are awakened out of this meditation it serves to incite us to amassing the collection of goodness, in the aftermath, which would serve as a cause for our attaining the forces of an Enlightened Being, and so on.


[4001]
CHOS NYID MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA’I MI RTOG YE SHES NYAN RANG GIS KYANG ‘THOB PAR GSUNGS PAS, DE KHO NA NYID KYI RTOGS PA YOD NA TSOGS GZHAN GSOG PA LA ‘BAD PA MI DGOS KYI, DE NYID LA GOMS PAS CHOG GO ZHES PA NI MI MKHAS PA’I BAB COL DU SMRA BA’O,,

So too, it has been stated that listeners and self-made buddhas can also attain that wisdom, beyond imagining any self-existence, with which one realizes—directly—the true nature of things.  As such, it is the ravings of a person who has no mastery when someone comes and says that—if you have reached the realization of suchness—then there is no need for you to make efforts in accumulating any other collections of good deeds; and that it will then be enough for you just to get used to this very thing.



Finishing off negative emotions

[4002]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second part from above; a description of how those at this level finish off all their negative emotions.


	[4003]
[VIII.2]
Sanskrit unavailable

,CHAGS PA MED PA’I BLO NI SKYON RNAMS
DAG DANG LHAN CIG MI GNAS PHYIR,
,SA BRGYAD PA LA DRI MA DE DAG
RTZA BCAS NYE BAR ZHI ‘GYUR ZHING,
,NYON MONGS ZAD CING SA GSUM BLA MAR
GYUR KYANG SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI NI,
,’BYOR PA MKHA’ LTAR MTHA’ BRAL MA LUS [215b]
‘THOB PAR NUS MA YIN,

		The state of mind
		Free of attachment

		No longer remains
		Combined with
		The various faults.

		As such, here at
		The eighth level

		All these impurities,
		With their roots,
		
		Are put to their
		Final rest.

		So too, we put
		A finish to the
		Negative emotions;

		And we have become
		A spiritual teacher
		For all three grounds.

		They are though
		Still unable
		To achieve

		All the riches
		Of the Buddhas,

		Which like the sky
		Are without any limits [f. 215b].


[4004]
GANG GI PHYIR SA BRGYAD PA ‘DIR RGYAL BA RNAMS KYIS ‘GOG PA LAS SLONG BA DE’I PHYIR SA ‘DIR, CHAGS PA MED PA’I BLO STE

Because here at the eighth level the Victors rouse the bodhisattva from their cessation, at this level then we have a state of mind which is free of attachment.


[4005]
YE SHES NI CHAGS SOGS NYON MONGS PA’I SKYON RNAMS DAG DANG LHAN CIG TU MI GNAS PA’I PHYIR, SA BRGYAD PA LA NI RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I YE SHES KYI NYI MA SHAR BAS,

At this point, our wisdom no longer remains combined with the various faults of everything involved with the negative emotions of craving and the like.  As such, here at the eighth level the sun of the wisdom that no longer imagines things in a mistaken way rises high.


[4006]
MUN PA LTA BU’I DRI MA STE NYON MONGS PA SNGAR BYUNG BA ‘KHOR BAR SKYE BA’I RGYUR GYUR BA, KHAMS GSUM NA SPYOD PA DE DAG THAMS CAD KYANG RTZA BA STE SA BON DANG BCAS PA NYE BAR ZHI BA STE SPANGS PAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

And something happens then to the impurities that are comparable to darkness here in the world; that is, to everything related to the negative emotions which—earlier on—served as causes for taking rebirth here in the cycle of pain.  That is, we are also able to put to their final rest—to eliminate—all these ways of carrying on a life in the three realms, along with the roots or deep seeds for them.


[4007]
DE LTAR NYON MONGS PA THAMS CAD ZAD CING SA GSUM STE KHAMS GSUM GYI BLA MAR GYUR KYANG,

So too, in this manner, we are able to put a finish to everything involved with the negative emotions; and then we have become a spiritual teacher for all three “grounds”—referring to the three realms.


[4008]
BYANG SEMS ‘DIS NYON MONGS ZAD PA’I GNAS SKABS DER, SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI NI YON TAN GYI ‘BYOR BA {%PA} MKHA’ LTAR MTHA’ DANG BRAL BA MA LUS PA ‘THOB PAR NUS PA MA YIN PAS, DE THOB PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR SA BRGYAD PA BA ‘DIS BSGRIM PAR BYA [f. 265b] DGOS SO,,

And let’s further consider the bodhisattva at this point, where they have finished off the negative emotions.  They are though still unable to achieve all of the riches of the high qualities of the Buddhas, which like the sky itself are without any limits.  As such, this bodhisattva at the eighth level needs to focus their efforts further, in order to achieve these riches.


[4009]
‘O NA SA ‘DIR NYON MONGS THAMS CAD ZAD PAR CIS SHES SHE NA,

One may ask: “How is it that we know that—at this level—all the negativities have been finished off?”


[4010]
SA BCU PA LAS, ‘DIR DE NYID KYI TSE YONGS SU MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ BAR ‘GYUR TE, ZHES GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR, SA ‘DIR KHAMS GSUM LAS SEMS ‘DOD CHAGS DANG BRAL BA NYID YOD PA YIN TE, NYON MONGS CHAD PA’I {%TSANG BA’I? carvings say CHAD PA’I} ‘DOD CHAGS DANG MA BRAL BA LA MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA MNGON DU BYED NUS PA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

The Sutra on the Ten Levels says that “here, at this point in time, one achieves total nirvana.”  As such, it is at this bodhisattva level that we find a mind which is perfectly free from desire for the three realms of existence.  And this is because a person could never have the capacity to actualize the state of nirvana so long as they were still not free of a state of desire where the negative emotions are complete.



The ten powers of the eighth

[4011]
GSUM PA NI,

Which brings us to our third point from above: a description of how the bodhisattva at the eighth level does come to attain the ten powers.


	[4012]
[VIII.3]
Sanskrit unavailable

,’KHOR BA ‘GAGS KYANG DBANG RNAMS BCU PO
THOB PAR ‘GYUR ZHING DE DAG GIS,
,SRID PA’I ‘GRO BAR RANG GI BDAG NYID
SNA TSOGS STON PAR BYED PAR ‘GYUR,

		They have put a
Stop to the cycle;

Despite that,
We attain
The ten powers.

These allow them to
Display their person

As an entire variety,
To beings of
The suffering world.
		

[4013]
GAL TE SA ‘DIR KHAMS GSUM LA ‘DOD CHAGS DANG BRAL NA ‘KHOR BAR SKYE BA ‘GAG PAS, JI LTAR NA ‘DI YIS SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYU’I CHOS MA LUS PA YONGS SU RDZOGS PA BYED PAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,

One may begin with the following question—

If, at this bodhisattva level, one is free of desire for the three realms, then they have stopped all rebirth in the cycle of pain.  How then is it that this individual acts to complete each & every one of those things which serve as a cause for Buddhahood?


[4014]
SA BRGYAD PA BA ‘DI YI LAS NYON GYI DBANG GIS ‘KHOR BAR ‘KHOR BA NI ‘GAGS MED {%MOD} KYANG, SA ‘DI THOB PA NA YE SHES LA DBANG BA SOGS KYI DBANG RNAM PA BCU PO THOB PAR ‘GYUR ZHING,

Admitted then that this bodhisattva at the eighth level has put a stop to circling in the cycle of pain due to the power of karma and negative emotions.  Despite that, when we do reach this particular level, we attain the ten different powers of achieving power over wisdom, and so on.


[4015]
DBANG BCU PO DE DAG GIS BYANG SEMS ‘DIS DPAL ‘PHRENG GI MDO LAS BSHAD PA LTAR GYI YID KYI RANG BZHIN GYI LUS KYI SGO NAS, SRID PA’I ‘GRO BA RNAMS SU RANG GI BDAG NYID KYI LUS SNA TSOGS PA STON PAR BYED PAR ‘GYUR BAS, ‘DI’I TSOGS YONGS SU RDZOGS PAR ‘GYUR BA MI ‘GAL LO,,

These ten powers allow the bodhisattva—as described in the Sutra of Shrimala—to become able to display their personal body as an entire variety of bodies, to those beings of the suffering world.  This is done through a physical form which has the nature of the thought.  As such, it is no contradiction to say that this particular individual’s accumulation of goodness has been completed, in its entirety.


[4016]
DBANG BCU NI BSKAL PA BRJOD DU MED PA’I YANG BRJOD DU MED PAR TSE’I TSAD BYIN GYIS RLOB PAS TSE LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

Here are the ten different powers:

1) The bodhisattva has achieved power over their lifespan, since—for groups of eons beyond description consisting of individual eons which are themselves beyond description—they have received blessings related to the length of their life.


[4017]
TING NGE ‘DZIN NGES PAR SEMS PA DPAG TU MED PA’I YE SHES KYI ‘JUG PAS SEMS LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

2) They have achieved power over their mind, since they have engaged in a wisdom consisting of unimaginable instances of deep absorption in meditation.


[4018]
‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS THAMS CAD RGYAN BKOD PA DU MAS RAB TU BRGYAN PA’I BYIN GYIS BRLABS KUN TU STON [f. 266a] PAS YO BYAD LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

3) They have achieved power over things, because they are able to display special blessings where all of the worlds are supremely decorated with a great many adornments.


[4019]
LAS KYI RNAM PAR SMIN PA BYIN GYIS BRLABS KYIS DUS JI LTA BA BZHIN DU STON PAS LAS LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

4) They have achieved power over karma, because they are able to display karmas at any time they may wish to, by performing blessings related to the ripening of karma.


[4020]
‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS THAMS CAD DU SKYE BA KUN TU STON PAS SKYE BA LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

5) They have achieved power over births, since they are able to display a birth in each and every one of the worlds there may be.


[4021]
SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHING DANG, DUS GANG DU CI DGA’ BAR MNGON PAR RDZOGS PAR BYANG CHUB PA KUN TU STON PAS SMON LAM LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

6) They have achieved power over prayer, since they are able to display Buddha paradises, and also—at whatever point in time they may wish—their own total enlightenment.


[4022]
‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS THAMS CAD SANGS RGYAS KYIS RAB TU GANG BA KUN TU STON PAS MOS PA LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

7) They have achieved power over wishes, because they are able to display all worlds as filled to the brim with Buddhas.


[4023]
SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHING THAMS CAD DU RDZU ‘PHRUL GYI RNAM PAR ‘PHRUL BA KUN TU STON PAS RDZU ‘PHRUL LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

8) They have achieved power over emanating, because they are able to display emanations in each and every Buddha paradise.


[4024]
DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I STOBS DANG, MI ‘JIGS PA DANG, SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS MA ‘DRES PA DANG, MTSAN DANG, DPE BYAD BZANG PO DANG, MNGON PAR RDZOGS PAR BYANG CHUB PA KUN TU STON PAS YE SHES LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,,

9) They have achieved power over wisdom, because they are able to display the powers of Those Gone Thus; their different forms of fearlessness; the unadmixed qualities of a Buddha; the excellent signs and marks upon an Enlightened Being’s body; and total enlightenment itself.


[4025]
MTHA’ DANG DBUS MED PA’I CHOS KYI SGO SNANG BA KUN TU STON PAS CHOS LA DBANG BA ‘THOB BO,

10) They have achieved power over the Dharma, for they are able to display the shining light of the doorways to the Dharma, without ends or middle.


[4026]
ZHES SA BCU PA LAS RGYA CHER GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

Here we have followed the extensive presentation of the powers as they are described in The Sutra on the Ten Levels.


	[4027]
[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA BRGYAD PA’O,,

		This concludes the eighth wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.


[4028]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA BRGYAD PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

This then concludes the explanation of the eighth ultimate “Wish for Enlightenment”—or chapter—in An Illumination of the True Intent, an extensive commentary to Entering the Middle Way.



The ninth level

[4029]
` ,,GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to the third part from above: our explanation of the ninth bodhisattva level


	[4030]
[IX.1]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DGU PA LA NI DE’I STOBS LTA ZHIG
MTHA’ DAG RDZOGS PAR DAG ‘GYUR ZHING,
,DE BZHIN YANG DAG RIG CHOS RANG GI
YON TAN YONGS SU DAG PA’ANG ‘THOB,

		At the ninth,
		The forces are
		Beyond description;

		All of them
		Become pure
		In a way which is
		Totally complete.

		In like manner
		They also achieve

		The different
		Total purities of
		Their fine qualities—

		The qualities of
		Pure understanding.		


[4031]
SA DGU PA LA NI BYANG SEMS DE’I STOBS LTA ZHIG STE STOBS KYI PHA ROL PHYIN PA MTHA’ DAG RDZOGS PAR DAG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

At the ninth bodhisattva level the forces of this bodhisattva are beyond description; which is to say, all of the perfections of force become pure in a way which is totally complete.


[4032]
STOBS KYI PHAR PHYIN LA STOBS BCU BSHAD PA NI THUB PA DGONGS RGYAN LAS,

This description of the perfection of the forces as being ten forces can be found as follows, in the Jewel of the True Thought of the Able Ones:


[4033]
DE LA BSAM PA’I STOBS NI NYON MONGS PA KUN TU SPYOD PA MED [f. 266b] PA’I PHYIR RO,,

1) The “force of thought” is so called because they no longer engage in anything related to the negative emotions.


[4034]
LTAG {%LHAG} PA’I BSAM PA’I STOBS NI SA’I YE SHES YONGS SU SBYANGS PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO,,

2) The “force of personal responsibility” is so called because they have, indeed, perfectly purified the wisdom of the levels.


[4035]
GZUNGS KYI STOBS NI CHOS MI BRJED PA NYID GYI PHYIR RO,,

3) The “force of words of the holding” is so called because they have a perfect ability to avoid ever forgetting the Dharma.


[4036]
TING NGE ‘DZIN GYI STOBS NI RTAG TU RNAM PAR G-YENGS PA MED PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO,,

4) The “force of deep meditation” is so called because they are always perfectly free of any kind of mental distraction.


[4037]
YANG DAG PAR ‘BYOR BA’I STOBS NI MTHA’ YAS SHING MUR THUG PA MED PA’I ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS KYI SPYOD PA RNAM PAR DBYE BA LA MKHAS PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO,,

5) The “force of applying themselves perfectly” is so called because they become absolute masters in every different variation of all the activities of the realm of the everyday world, endless as these are, beyond any possible limit.


[4038]
DBANG GI STOBS NI YID LA RE BA THAMS CAD YONGS SU RDZOGS PA THOB PA’I PHYIR RO,,

6) The “force of power” is so called because they have reached a point where they have totally fulfilled each and every hope of their hearts.


[4039]
SPOBS PA’I STOBS NI SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS THAMS CAD RNAM PAR SPYOD PA RNAM PAR DBYE BA LA MKHAS PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO,,

7) The “force of confidence” is so called because they are absolute masters in all the different divisions of activity for all the different kinds of Dharma ever taught by the Buddhas.


[4040]
SMON LAM GYI STOBS NI SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD KYI SPYOD PA LA SBYOR BA MI GTONG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

8) The “force of prayer” is so called because they never give up applying themselves in the activities of each and every Buddha.


[4041]
PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I STOBS NI BDAG NYID KYIS SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS YONGS SU SMIN PAR BYED PA DANG, SEMS CAN YONGS SU SMIN PAR BYED PA DANG, SEMS CAN THAMS CAD LA PHAN PA’I SPYOD PA MI GTONG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

9) The “force of perfection” is so called because they never give up working themselves to bring to their complete ripening all the qualities of the Buddhas; and they never give up working to bring all living beings to this ripening; and they never abandon working for the benefit of every single being.


[4042]
BYAMS PA CHEN PO’I STOBS NI SEMS CAN THAMS CAD BSKYAB PA LA MCHOG TU SBYOR BA MI GTONG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

10) The “force of great love” is so called because they never give up their efforts to bring every living being to the highest form of protection.


[4043]
SNYING RJE CHEN PO’I STOBS NI SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI SDUG BSNGAL THAMS CAD SEL BAR BYED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

11) The “force of great compassion” is so called because they work to clear away all the sufferings of each and every living being.


[4044]
CHOS NYID KYI STOBS NI SGYU MA LTA BU LA SOGS PA’I CHOS NYID MNGON DU BYED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

12) The “force of the way things are” is so called because they have brought forth all the ways that things are—such as their being like an illusion.


[4045]
DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA THAMS CAD KYIS BYIN GYIS RLOB PA’I STOBS NI RNAM PA THAMS CAD PA’I THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES LA MNGON DU PHYOGS PAR GYUR PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO,

13) And then finally the “force of the blessings of each and every One Gone Thus” is so called because they are quite surely approaching the knowledge of all things, in all the forms it may take.


[4046]
ZHES PA MDO [f. 267a] SDER BSTAN PA’I STOBS RNAMS SO, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR RO,,

These then are the forces that have been taught in the collection of sutras.


[4047]
STOBS KYI PHAR PHYIN RDZOGS PA DE BZHIN DU SO SO YANG DAG PAR RIG PA’I CHOS KYI RANG GI YON TAN YONGS SU DAG PA BZHI’ANG ‘THOB STE, CHOS DANG, DON DANG, NGES PA’I TSIG DANG, SPOBS PA SO SO YANG DAG PAR RIG PA BZHI’O,,

In addition to completing the perfection of the forces, in like manner do these bodhisattvas also achieve the four different total purities of their fine qualities—the qualities of pure understanding.  These are the four pure understandings of the details of the Dharma; of meanings; of different words for the same ideas; and of confidence.


[4048]
DE LA DANG POS NI CHOS RNAMS KYI RANG RANG SO SO’I MTSAN NYID RAB TU SHES SO,,

1) The first of these refers to the perfect knowledge of all the various defining characteristics for each and every existing object.


[4049]
GNYIS PAS NI CHOS THAMS CAD KYI RNAM PA’I DBYE BA SHES SO,,

2) The second refers to a knowledge of the different categories of all existing things.


[4050]
GSUM PAS NI CHOS RNAMS MA ‘DRES PAR SO SOR STON PA SHES SO,,

3) The third refers to a knowledge of how to teach each different thing, individually, without mixing them up in any way.


[4051]
BZHI PAS NI CHOS RNAMS KYI MTHUN PA’I RGYU RGYUN CHAD PA MED PA RAB TU SHES PAR

4) The fourth refers to a perfect knowledge of the uninterrupted flow of all of the conducive conditions for the different teachings.


[4052]
RANG ‘GREL LAS GSUNGS SO,,

These are the descriptions of the four, as we find them in the autocommentary.


[4053]
GZHUNG GZHAN LAS MING GI RNAM GRANGS KYI CHOS DANG, BRJOD BYA’I DON DANG, SGRA’I NGES PA’I TSIG DANG, SPOBS PA MI ZAD PA RIG PA LA BSHAD DO,,

In other sources we see the four explained as an understanding of the different names for the same things; of the meaning being expressed; of the etymology of the term; and of never-ending confidence.


	[4054]
[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA DGU PA’O,,

This concludes the ninth wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.


[4055]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA DGU PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

This then concludes the explanation of the ninth ultimate “Wish for Enlightenment”—or chapter—in An Illumination of the True Intent, an extensive commentary to Entering the Middle Way.



The tenth level

[4056]
` ,,BZHI PA NI,

With this we have reached our fourth point: an explanation of the tenth bodhisattva level.


	[4057]
[X.1]
Sanskrit unavailable

,BCU PA’I SA LA DE YIS KUN NAS
SANGS RGYAS RNAMS LAS DBANG BSKUR BA,
,DAM PA ‘THOB CING YE SHES LHAG PAR
MCHOG TU BYUNG BAR GYUR PA’ANG YIN,
,CHAR SPRIN RNAMS LAS CHU CHAR ‘BAB PA
JI LTAR DE BZHIN ‘GRO RNAMS KYI,
,DGE BA’I LO TOG CHED DU RGYAL SRAS
LAS KYANG LHUN GRUB CHOS CHAR ‘BAB,

		At the tenth level,
		This one receives

		The highest investment
		Into power,

		From all the Buddhas
		Of every corner.

		High knowledge
		Also reaches
		Its highest expression.

		The rains
		Are sent down
		From the rainclouds;

		Just so, the
		Children of the Victors
		Also let the rain
		Fall, spontaneously,

		For the crops
		Of virtue among
		Living beings.		


[4058]
SA BCU PA LA GNAS PA’I BYANG SEMS DE YIS PHYOGS BCU KUN NAS, SANGS RGYAS RNAMS LAS ‘OD ZER CHEN PO’I DBANG BSKUR BA DAM PA STE MCHOG ‘THOB BO,,

This bodhisattva at the tenth level receives the highest—the supreme—investment into power, in the form of massive rays of light, from all the Buddhas residing in every corner of the universe.


[4059]
‘THOB TSUL NI BYANG SEMS ‘DIS TING NGE ‘DZIN GRANGS MED PA ‘BUM PHRAG BCU THOB PA’I THA MA LA, THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES DANG KHYAD PAR MED PAR DBANG BSKUR BA DANG LDAN PA ZHES BYA BA’I TING NGE ‘DZIN MNGON DU ‘GYUR RO,,

Just how does this happen?  This bodhisattva attains all ten groups of the hundred thousand collections of “countless” forms of meditative concentration.  And then at the end of this process, they manifest that concentration which is known as “coming to possess an investment into power which in no way differs from the wisdom of omniscience.”


[4060]
DE NAS DE MA THAG TU STONG GSUM ‘BUM PHRAG BCU’I GTOS DANG MNYAM PA’I RIN PO CHE CHEN PO’I PAD+MA RIN PO [f. 267b] CHE RNAM PA THAMS CAD KYI MCHOG DANG LDAN PA ZHES BYA BA NAS,

And then it all follows the description we find in The Sutra on the Ten Levels:

Just after that then, there appears first a precious lotus—possessed of all the highest qualities—made of precious jewel; in extent, it matches the size of ten different groups of a hundred thousand galaxies of a billion planets each.


[4061]
RGYAS PAR STONG GSUM ‘BUM PHRAG BCUR TSAD PA’I RDUL PHRA RAB KYI RDUL SNYED KYI PAD+MA’I ‘KHOR DANG LDAN PA ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR TE, 

And then (as the description continues) this lotus is surrounded by a group of lotuses equal in number to all the atoms there are, and equal in extent to ten groups of a hundred thousand galaxies of a billion planets each.


[4062]
BYANG SEMS DE’I LUS KYANG DE DANG ‘TSAM PAR GNAS SO,,

And the body of this bodhisattva matches the sizes here.


[4063]
TING NGE ‘DZIN DE THOB MA THAG TU PAD+MA DE LA ‘DUG PAR KUN TU SNANG NGO,,

And just after they attain that state of meditative concentration, they make their final appearance, upon that lotus.


[4064]
DE DE LA ‘DUG PA DANG, SANGS RGYAS SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHING KUN NAS GDAN ‘DZOM PA RNAMS KYI MDZOD SPU NAS, 

Here then the bodhisattva takes their seat.  And then rays of light spring forth the pores of the skin upon every Buddha in every Buddha paradise there is, as these all gather together.


[4065]
‘OD ZER BYUNG NAS BYANG SEMS DE LA DBANG BSKUR BAR MDZAD DO, ZHES BYA BA’I BAR DU SA BCU PA LAS GSUNGS PA LTA BU’O,,

And the light goes forth, and grants the bodhisattva their investment into power.


[4066]
BYANG SEMS ‘DI LA PHAR PHYIN BCU’I NANG NAS YE SHES KYI PHAR PHYIN LHAG PAR MCHOG TU BYUNG BA STE DAG PAR ‘GYUR BA’ANG YIN NO,,

So too, for this bodhisattva the perfection of high knowledge—from among the ten different perfections—also reaches its highest expression; which is to say, it comes to its highest state of purity.


[4067]
YE SHES KYI NGOS ‘DZIN DANG DE DANG SHES RAB KYI PHAR PHYIN GYI KHYAD PAR NI, ,BYANG SA LAS,

How do we identify the kind of wisdom here?  And how does it differ from the perfection of wisdom?  Here is how The Levels of the Bodhisattva describes it—


[4068]
CHOS THAMS CAD LA JI LTA BA BZHIN DU RNAM PAR BZHAG PA SHES PA NI, YE SHES KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’O,,

That knowing where we have gone into a balanced meditation on the real nature of each and every existing entity is the perfection of high knowledge.


[4069]
DE LA DON DAM PA ‘DZIN PA LA ZHUGS PA’I SHES RAB NI, SHES RAB KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’O,,

The wisdom where we have gone into holding to the ultimate is the perfection of wisdom.


[4070]
KUN RDZOB ‘DZIN PA LA ZHUGS PA NI YE SHES KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA STE, ‘DI GNYIS KYI BYE BRAG NI DE YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

When we have gone into holding to the deceptive, then that is the perfection of high knowledge.  And that expresses the difference beween these two.


[4071]
CHAR SPRIN RNAMS LAS ‘JIG RTEN PA RNAMS KYI LO TOG SPEL BA’I SLAD DU CHU CHAR ‘BAB PA JI LTA BA

The rains are sent down from the rainclouds in order to multiply the crops of those living here in the world.


[4072]
DE BZHIN DU, GDUL BYA’I ‘GRO BA RNAMS KYI DGE BA’I LO TOG SPEL BA’I CHED DU, RGYAL SRAS SA BCU PA BA ‘DI LAS KYANG LHUN GYIS GRUB PAR DAM PA’I CHOS KYI CHAR MNGON PAR ‘BAB PA STE ‘BEBS SO,,

Just so, the children of the Victors residing here at the tenth bodhisattva level also “let the rain fall”; they drop down, generously, and spontaneously, the rain of the holy Dharma.  And this is all for the purpose of multiplying the crops of virtue among those living beings who are their disciples.


[4073]
DE’I PHYIR SA ‘DI LA CHOS KYI SPRIN ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

And this in fact is why this bodhisattva level is known as “The Rain of the Dharma.”


	[4074]
	[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA BCU PA’O,,

This concludes the tenth wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.


[4075]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB TU GSAL [f. 268a] BA LAS, DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA BCU PA’I BSHAD PA’O,,

This then concludes the explanation of the tenth ultimate “Wish for Enlightenment”—or chapter—in An Illumination of the True Intent, an extensive commentary to Entering the Middle Way.



High qualities
of the first level

[4076]
` ,,GSUM PA SA BCU’I YON TAN BSTAN PA LA GSUM, SA DANG PO’I YON TAN BSHAD PA, SA GNYIS PA NAS BDUN PA’I BAR GYI YON TAN BSHAD PA, DAG PA SA GSUM GYI YON TAN BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our third more general step from above: a description of the high good qualities of the ten bodhisattva levels.  We’ll proceed in three parts: an explanation of the high good qualities of the first level; an explanation of the high good qualities of the second to the seventh levels; and an explanation of the high good qualities of the three pure levels.  Here then is the first of these.


	[4077]
[afterword.1]
Sanskrit unavailable

,,DE TSE ‘DIS NI SANGS RGYAS BRGYA MTHONG ZHING,
,DE DAG BYIN GYI BRLABS KYANG ‘DI YIS RTOGS,
,DE NYID TSE NA BSKAL PA BRGYAR GNAS SHING,
,SNGON DANG PHYI MA’I MTHAR YANG YANG DAG ‘JUG

		At that point,
		This one sees
		A million Buddhas,

		And these grant
		Their blessing, and
		They perceive it.

		In this very moment
		They stay there
		For a million eons;

		And they engage
		Perfectly in this
		In both the
		
		Beginning end
		And the final end.


[4078]
DON DAM PA’I SEMS BSKYED PA SA DANG PO THOB PA DE’I TSE SA DANG PO BA ‘DIS NI, SKAD CIG THANG CIG YUD TZAM CIG LA SANGS RGYAS BRGYA MTHONG BA DANG, SANGS RGYAS BRGYA PO DE DAG GIS RANG BYIN GYIS BRLABS KYANG STE BRLABS PA YANG BYANG SEMS ‘DI YIS RTOGS PA DANG, 

At that point where we attain this first level of giving rise to the ultimate wish for enlightenment, this practitioner at the first level—in but a single instant in time, in but a moment—sees a million different Buddhas.  And these million Buddhas grant their blessing to the bodhisattva, and the bodhisattva perceives this blessing.


[4079]
SA DANG PO LA GNAS PA DE NYID KYI TSE NA BSKAL PA BRGYAR GNAS PAR BYED PA DANG, BSKAL PA BRGYA LA SNGON DANG PHYI MA’I MTHAR YANG YANG DAG PAR ‘JUG GO

In this very moment that the bodhisattva resides at the first level, they are able to stay there for a million eons; and they engage perfectly in this million eons in both the beginning end and the final end of the period.


[4080]
,DE’I DON NI SNGON DANG PHYI MA’I MTHA’I BSKAL PA BRGYAR YANG YE SHES KYI MTHONG BA ‘JUG PA’O,,

What this last point means is that they engage in the seeing of wisdom for a million eons in both the beginning end, and the final end, of the period.


	[4081]
[afterword.2]
Sanskrit unavailable

,BLO LDAN TING ‘DZIN BRGYA PHRAG SNYOMS PAR
‘JUG CING GTONG BYED DE {%or DO?},
,’JIG RTEN KHAMS BRGYA ‘DI YIS KUN NAS
G-YO ZHING SNANG BAR NUS,
,DE BZHIN RDZU ‘PHRUL GYIS DE SEMS CAN
BRGYA PHRAG SMIN BYED CING,
,BRGYA PHRAG GRANGS DANG RJES ‘BREL ZHING DAG
TU YANG ‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR,

		This intelligent one
		Engages in,
		And then releases,
		
		A million
		Different states of
		Meditative concentration.

		They also cause a
		Million different
		Planets to tremble,

		And further have
		The capacity
		To spread light
		Over them.

		Just so, this one—
		Using their power
		Of performing miracles—

		Is able to bring
		To ripening
		A million
		Living beings.

		And they are
		Also able to
		Travel to those

		Connected in number
		To that million.


[4082]
BLO LDAN TE BYANG SEMS ‘DIS TING NGE ‘DZIN BRGYA PHRAG GCIG LA SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG CING GTONG BA STE LDANG BAR YANG BYED DO,,

This intelligent one—this bodhisattva—further engages in and then releases (which is to say, rises from) a million different states of meditative concentration.


[4083]
BYANG SEMS ‘DI YIS ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS BRGYA KUN NAS G-YO BAR BYED PA DANG, ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS BRGYA SNANG BAR BYED NUS PA DANG,

They—the bodhisattva—also causes a million different planets to tremble; and further has the capacity to spread light over a million different worlds.


[4084]
DE BZHIN DU RDZU ‘PHRUL GYIS BYANG SEMS DES SEMS CAN BRGYA PHRAG GCIG SMIN PAR BYED PA DANG, BRGYA PHRAG GI GRANGS DANG RJES SU ‘BREL BA STE GRANGS DANG LDAN PA’I SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHING DAG TU YANG ‘GRO BAR ‘GYUR BA DANG,

Just so, this bodhisattva is able to bring to ripening a million living beings, using their power of performing miracles.  And they are also able to travel to Buddha paradises “connected in number”—which is to say, equal in number—to that million.


	[4085]
[afterword.3]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DES NI CHOS KYI SGO RNAMS YANG DAG
‘BYED BYED THUB DBANG SRAS,
,RANG GI LUS LA LUS RNAMS KUN NAS
STON PAR BYED PA’ANG YIN,
,RANG GI ‘KHOR DANG BCAS PAS MDZES ‘BYOR
LUS NI RE RE ZHING ,
,RGYAL BA’I SRAS PO BRGYA PHRAG DAG DANG
RJES SU ‘BREL PA’ANG STON,

		This one acts,
		Further, to open—
		Perfectly—

		Different doorways
		Of the Dharma.

		This child
		Of the Lords
		Of the Able Ones

		Is also able
		To show their body
		Widely, in
		Different forms.

		Each of these forms
		Is, further, accompanied

		By a group
		Of a million
		Children of the Victors,
		Which they display:

		They are rich
		In a lovely circle
		Of followers.


[4086]
BYANG SEMS DES NI CHOS KYI SGO RNAMS TE BRGYA YANG DAG PAR ‘BYED PAR BYED PA DANG, THUB DBANG GI SRAS PO ‘DIS RANG GI LUS LA LUS BRGYA RNAMS KUN NAS STON [f. 268b] PAR BYED PA’ANG YIN PA DANG, 

This bodhisattva acts, further, to open—perfectly—a million (“many”) different doorways of the Dharma.  This child of the Lords of the Able Ones is also able to show their body widely, in a million different forms.


[4087]
LUS NI BRGYA PO RE RE ZHING YANG RGYAL BA’I SRAS PO BRGYA PHRAG RE RE DAG DANG RJES SU ‘BREL BA’ANG STON PA’I RANG GI ‘KHOR DANG BCAS PAS MDZES SHING ‘BYOR BA’O,,

Each of these million various forms is, further, accompanied by a group of a million children of the Victors, which they display.  As such, they are rich in a lovely circle of followers.



High qualities of levels
two through seven

[4088]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to the second point here: an explanation of the high good qualities of the second to the seventh levels.


	[4089]
[afterword.4]
Sanskrit unavailable

,BLO LDAN RAB TU DGA’ BAR GNAS PAS
YON TAN DE DAG NI,
,THOB PAR GYUR NAS DE BZHIN KHO NAR
DRI MA MED GNAS PAS,
,DE DAG STONG NI YANG DAG ‘THOB PAR
‘GYUR TE SA LNGA PO,

When this intelligent one
Residing at the level
Of Perfect Happiness

Has attained those
High qualities,

Then they reside,
Just so,
At this level
Known as “Immaculate.”

And they attain,
Perfectly,

This same number,
But composed
Of a thousand members.


[4090]
BLO LDAN SA RAB TU DGA’ BAR GNAS PAS YON TAN BRGYA PHRAG BCU GNYIS PO DE DAG NI THOB PAR GYUR NAS, SA GNYIS PAR ‘PHOS PA NAS DANG PO LA BSHAD PA DE BZHIN KHO NAR SA DRI MA MED PA LA GNAS PAS, YON TAN SDE TSAN BCU GNYIS PO DE DAG NI STONG DU BYAS PA YANG DAG PAR ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

When this intelligent one residing at (1) the level of Perfect Happiness has attained those twelve different groups of a hundred high qualities each, they move to the second bodhisattva level.  And then they reside at (2) this level known as “Immaculate,” just as we explained them doing at the first level.  And they attain, perfectly, this same number of groups of high qualities (twelve), except that these are now composed of a thousand members of features each.


	[4091]
[afterword.5]
Sanskrit unavailable

,’DI DAG RNAMS LA BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’
YIS NI ‘BUM PHRAG DANG,
,BYE BA PHRAG BRGYA ‘THOB CING DE YIS
BYE BA STONG ‘GYUR ‘THOB,
,DE NAS BYE BA BRGYA PHRAG STONG [216a] ‘GYUR
YANG ‘THOB BYE BA PHRAG
,KHRAG KHRIG PHRAG BRGYAR RDZOGS PAR BSGRUB DANG
SLAR YANG STONG PHRAG TU,
,YANG DAG PAR NI BSGYUR BA MTHA’ DAG
RAB TU ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR,

At five different
Levels, these come
To be completed

In groups attained of
A hundred thousand;
A billion; ten billion;
A trillion; and a
Hundred quintillion.

And then once more
Everything is multiplied,
By another thousand,
For a grand total [f. 216a].


[4092]
YON TAN SDE TSAN BCU GNYIS PO DE DAG NYID SA GSUM PA, BZHI PA LNGA PA DRUG PA BDUN PA STE SA LNGA PO ‘DI DAG RNAMS LA BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ LNGA PO YIS NI, RIM PA BZHIN DU ‘BUM PHRAG BCU GNYIS DANG, BYE BA PHRAG BRGYA PA BCU GNYIS DANG, BYE BA PHRAG STONG BCU GNYIS DANG, BYE BA BRGYA PHRAG STONG BCU GNYIS DANG, BYE BA PHRAG KHRAG KHRIG PHRAG BRGYAR RDZOGS PAR BSGYUR BA STE BYE BA ‘BUM PA BCU GNYIS DANG,

Let’s consider then these same twelve groups of high qualities at five different bodhisattva levels: the third, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, and the seventh.  These five different bodhisattvas come to be completed—respectively—in (3) twelve groups of a hundred thousand high qualities each; (4) twelve groups of a billion high qualities each; (5) twelve groups of ten billion high qualities each; (6) twelve groups of a trillion high qualities each; and then finally becoming complete in (7) twelve groups of a hundred quintillion high qualities each; which is to say, twelve groups of a hundred thousand groups of ten million good qualities each.


[4093]
SLAR YANG STONG PHRAG TU YANG DAG PAR NI BSGYUR BA MTHA’ DAG STE KHRAG KHRIG ‘BUM PHRAG BCU GNYIS RAB TU ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And then once more everything is multiplied, perfectly, by another thousand for a grand total; which is to say, they come to attain twelve groups of hundred thousand groups each, and each of those with 100 billion good qualities each.



High qualities of
the three pure levels

[4094]
GSUM PA NI,

And then this brings us to our third point from above: an explanation of the high good qualities the three pure levels.


[4095]
SA BRGYAD PA NAS YON TAN DE RNAMS GRANGS KYI GNAS KYIS BGRANG BAR MI NUS PAS, RDUL PHRA RAB RNAMS KYIS YONGS SU BGRANG BAR BSHAD PA,

From the eighth bodhisattva level on, it’s not possible to count the high qualities with any kind of existing numbers; as such, we need to express the count as equivalent to that of the number of atoms in selected bodies of the galaxy.


	[4096]
[afterword.6]
Sanskrit unavailable

,MI G-YO’I SAR GNAS RNAM RTOG MED PA DES,
,STONG GSUM BRGYA PHRAG STONG BSDOMS ‘JIG RTEN NA,
,RDUL TSAD JI SNYED YOD PA DE RNAMS DANG,
,GRANGS MNYAM YON TAN DAG NI ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR,

		One staying at
		Unmoving has no
		Mistaken thoughts;

		They incorporate
		A thousand galaxies

		Of a hundred billion
		Planets each.

		Take all the atoms
		That exist
		In the worlds;

		The number
		Of fine qualities
		That they attain

		Is equal to
		That total.


[4097]
MI G-YO BA’I SA SA BRGYAD PA LA GNAS PA, GANG ZAG DANG CHOS LA BDEN ‘DZIN GYI RNAM RTOG MED PA DES STONG GSUM BRGYA PHRAG STONG BSDOMS PA STE,

Let’s start with a person who is staying at the eighth bodhisattva level: Unmoving.  This individual, who has no mistaken thoughts holding to some true existence either of the person or things, “incorporates” a thousand galaxies of a hundred billion planets each.


[4098]
STONG GSUM GYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS GSUM GYI ‘JIG RTEN NA [f. 269a] RDUL GYI GRANGS TSAD JI SNYED YOD PA DE RNAMS DANG GRANGS MNYAM PA’I YON TAN SDE TSAN DAG NI ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Which is to say, we would have to take all the atoms that existed in the worlds of three galaxies of a billion planets each.  And then the number of fine qualities that this particular bodhisattva attains is equal to that total.


	[4099]
[afterword.7]
Sanskrit unavailable

,LEGS PA’I BLO GROS SA LA GNAS PA YI,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS DES SNGAR BSTAN YON TAN DAG
,GRANGS MED BRGYA PHRAG STONG DU YANG DAG PAR,
,BSDOMS PA PHRAG BCU’I RDUL TSAD THOB PAR ‘GYUR,

		The bodhisattva
Residing at the level
Of Fine Wisdom

Possesses ten groups
Of fine qualities
Equal to the
Previously mentioned,

Multiplied by
A thousand groups
Of a hundred,

Each consisting
Of a countless number—

These attain
A number equal.


[4100]
SA DGU PA LEGS PA’I BLO GROS KYI SA LA GNAS PA’I BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ DES, YON TAN SNGAR BSTAN PA’I SDE BCU GNYIS DAG GRANGS MED BRGYA PHRAG STONG DU YANG DAG PAR BSDOMS PA PHRAG BCU STE, 

Let’s consider next the bodhisattva residing at the ninth level, Fine Wisdom.  They possess ten groups of fine qualities equal to the previously mentioned twelve groups, multiplied by a thousand groups of a hundred, each consisting of a “countless” number.


[4101]
STONG GSUM GYI ‘JIG RTEN GYI KHAMS GRANGS MED PA ‘BUM PHRAG BCU’I RDUL PHRA RAB KYI GRANGS KYI TSAD DANG MNYAM PA THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

Which is to say, these bodhisattvas attain a number of fine qualities equal to the number of atoms in a million groups of 1060 galaxies of a billion planets each.


	[4102]
[afterword.8]
Sanskrit unavailable

,RE ZHIG BCU PA ‘DIR DE’I YON TAN DAG,
,NGAG GI SPYOD YUL LAS CHES ‘DAS ‘GYUR ZHING,
,NGAG GI SPYOD YUL MA YIN BSDOMS RNAMS NI,
,RDUL DAG JI SNYED YOD PA DE SNYED ‘GYUR,

		Provisionally,
		The number of
		Fine qualities
		Here at the tenth

		Is far beyond
		Ever being expressed;
		It is nothing that
		Could ever be
		Expressed in speech.

		In sum,
		They are equal
		In count to the atoms.


[4103]
SA BCU PA ‘DIR SA DE’I YON TAN NI, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SDE TSAN BCU GNYIS PO DAG {%NGAG} GI SPYOD YUL LAS CHES ‘DAS PAR ‘GYUR ZHING, NGAG GI SPYOD YUL MA YIN PA 

Here at the tenth level, the number of fine qualities of the level is far beyond being an object that could ever be expressed in the groups of twelve; it is nothing that could ever be expressed in speech.


[4104]
BSDOMS PA STE SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHING BRJOD DU MED PA’I YANG BRJOD DU MED PA’I RDUL GYI GRANGS DAG JI SNYED YOD PA DE SNYED KYI GRANGS DANG MNYAM PA ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

In sum though we could say that the bodhisattva here attains a number of fine qualities which is equal in count to the number of atoms that are found in an unspeakable number of groups of an unspeakable number each of enlightened paradises.


[4105]
RE ZHIG GI SGRAS NI SA BCU PA BA LA YON TAN ‘DIR BRJOD PA DE TZAM DU ZAD PA MIN NO, ZHES RE ZHIG SNGON LA ‘DI BRJOD CES ‘OG NAS YON TAN GZHAN STON PA’I GO RIM BRJOD PA’O,,

The term “provisionally” here is meant to indicate that “the number of fine qualities we have described here for the bodhisattva at the tenth level is not something that ends with just that many.”  Which is to say, the number we have “provisionally” mentioned here earlier on is followed by later stages in the description which list other qualities.


	[4106]
[afterword.9]
Sanskrit unavailable

,BA SPU’I KHUNG BUR
BYANG CHUB SEMS RNAMS DANG,
,LHAN CIG RDZOGS SANGS
RGYAS SKU BGRANG ‘DAS DANG,
,DE BZHIN LHA DANG
LHA MIN MI DAG KYANG,
,SKAD CIG SKAD CIG
LA NI STON PAR NUS,

		They are able
		To display,

		From the pores
		Of their body,

		The holy bodies
		Of bodhisattvas

		And totally
		Enlightened beings
		Beyond number.

		Just so, as well,
		They display—
		Moment by moment—
		
		Worldly gods,
		Demigods,
		And humans.


[4107]
GZHAN YANG BYANG SEMS ‘DIS NI SPRUL PA STON PA LA RTOG PA’I KUN SLONG RGYU BA MED PAR, RANG GI LUS KYI BA SPU’I KHUNG BU RE RER BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS DANG RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS KYI SKU GRANGS LAS ‘DAS PA RE RE ZHING,

We can moreover say that when this bodhisattva undertakes to show emanations, they do so without any running of motivation involving conceptual thought.  They are able to display, first of all, individual groups of holy bodies of bodhisattvas and totally enlightened beings beyond all number, from each and every single one of the pores of their body.


[4108]
BYANG SEMS GZHAL GYIS MI LANG BA’I ‘KHOR RNAMS DANG LHAN CIG PA RNAMS DANG SKAD CIG SKAD CIG LA NI RIM PA GZHAN DANG GZHAN DU YANG STON PAR NUS LA,

And then they are able to show, at the same time, retinues of bodhisattvas beyond all estimation accompanying each of these bodies; and moment by moment they display as well continuous waves of such beings as well.


[4109]
DE BZHIN DU DE DAG LAS GZHAN ‘GRO [f. 269b] BA LNGA’I ‘KHOR BA LHA DANG LHA MIN DANG MI LA SOGS PA’I DBYE BAS THA DAD PA YANG MA ‘DRES PAR BA SPU’I KHUNG BU RE RER SKAD CIG RE RE LA STON PAR NUS SO,,

Just so, they are capable of displaying, from each and every one of the pores of their body, separate and discrete retinues composed of other sorts of living beings, from among the five general types of those beings.  These include, for example, worldly gods; demigods; humans, and all the rest.


[4110]
KYANG GI SGRA NI MA SMOS PA BSDU BA’I DON DU STE, MA SMOS PA GANG SDUD NA BRGYA BYIN DANG, TSANGS PA DANG, ‘JIG RTEN SKYONG BA DANG, MI’I RGYAL PO DANG, NYAN THOS DANG, RANG SANGS RGYAS DANG,

This point is summarized in the section [from the autocommentary] that includes:

The phrase “as well” in the verse here is meant to include those beings not directly mentioned.  Those that are not so listed include worldly gods such as Destroyer of the Hundred Cities; Pure One; and Protector of the World; as well as kings among the humans, listeners, and self-made buddhas.


[4111]
DE BZHIN GSHEGS PAS GDUL BA’I SEMS CAN RNAMS LA BRGYA BYIN LA SOGS PA’I GZUGS BZUNG NAS LHUN GYIS GRUB PAR CHOS STON PAR NUS SO, ZHES BYA BA LA SOGS PA’I BAR GYI DON SDUD PA’O,,

The Ones Thus Gone are able to teach the Dharma spontaneously, by taking on for those living beings they seek to tame the form of Destroyer of the Hundred Cities, or whatever it might be.


[4112]
RGYAS PAR NI SA BCU PA LAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

For more detail on these points, please refer to The Sutra on the Ten Levels.



How we first reach enlightenment

[4113]
GNYIS PA ‘BRAS BU’I SA LA LNGA, DANG POR SANGS RGYAS PA’I TSUL, SKU DANG YON TAN GYI RNAM GZHAG ,SPRUL PA’I SKU BSTAN PA, THEG PA GCIG TU BSGRUB PA, MNGON PAR BYANG CHUB PA DANG BZHUGS PA’I DUS KYI BSHAD PA’O,,

This brings us far back, to a second section promised, for a presentation on those levels which consist of the result.  Here we proceed in five steps: (1) the way in which we first reach our enlightenment; (2) a description of the holy body, and the fine qualities, that we then achieve; (3) a presentation concerning our emanation body; (4) a proof that in the end it is all a single path; and (5) an explanation of the point at which we have become enlightened, and remain there.


[4114]
DANG PO LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these steps has two parts of its own: the actual point, and then refuting argument on this point.  Here is the first.


	[4115]
[afterword.10]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GANG PHYIR NAM MKHA’ ‘DRI MA MED LA
ZLA SNANG GSAL BAR GYUR BA’I PHYIR,
,SNGON TSE STOBS BCU BSKYED PA’I SA LA
KHYOD KYIS SLAR YANG ‘BAD GYUR ZHING,
,’OG MIN DU NI GANG GI DON DU
‘BAD GYUR GO ‘PHANG MCHOG ZHI BA,
,YON TAN MTHA’ DAG MTHAR THUG MTSUNGS PA
MED DE KHYOD KYIS BRNYES,

		It’s all because
The moon is shining
		In a perfectly clear sky—

		They make
		Great efforts further,
		At the level where,

		Earlier,
		They created
		The ten forces.

		This is found
		By them
		In “Below None”;

		Peace, the highest
		State of being:

		The ultimate among
		All high qualities,
And beyond all equal—

		This is found by them.


[4116]
JI LTAR TE DPER NA ZLA BA’I SNANG BAS NAM MKHA’ DRI MA MED PA LA ‘GRO BA MA LUS PA GSAL BAR NUS PA

Think of how—when the moon is shining—it is able, in a perfectly clear sky, to provide light for each and every living being.


[4117]
DE BZHIN DU, SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS RNAMS ‘THOB PA LA GEGS BYED PA’I MUN PA SBYONG BAR MDZAD PA THUGS BSKYED PA BCU PA BRNYES PAS,

It’s just the same when we have been able to clear away the darkness that acts as an obstacle to our achieving the qualities of an Enlightened Being, and reach the tenth “level of attaining the holy Wish.”


[4118]
RANG GIS SANGS RGYAS KYI CHOS RNAMS BRNYES NUS PAR MKHYEN NAS, SLAR YANG STOBS BCU PA SANGS RGYAS KYI SA BSKYED PA’I SNGON GYI SA BCU PA DER SANGS RGYAS KYI SA ‘THOB PA LA ‘BAD PA MDZAD PA’AM BRTZAMS PAR GYUR CING,

Knowing that we will now be able to achieve all the qualities of a Buddha, we apply ourselves further, and so this person with the ten forces makes great efforts to work at the tenth level that we had achieved earlier, in order to attain here the level of an Enlightened Being.  That is, the bodhisattva at the tenth level is in the act of creating a level of enlightenment itself.


[4119]
GANG GI DON DU ‘BAD PA ‘DI BRTZAMS PAR GYUR PA’I GO ‘PHANG MCHOG ZHI BA BLA NA MED PA’I YE SHES DE YANG, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS ‘OG MIN DU [f. 270a] NI STE GNAS DE KHO NAR KHYOD KYIS BRNYES PAR GYUR TO,,

And let’s consider this goal that we are working for—exerting ourselves for.  This is the matchless peace, or wisdom, of the highest state of being.  And this is found by them only at a certain place: in the paradise known as “Below None,” where the Conquerors themselves reside.


[4120]
YE SHES DE NI YON TAN MTHA’ DAG GI MTHAR THUG PA STE, DRAN PA NYER GZHAG LA SOGS PA’I YON TAN MTHA’ DAG ‘DIR MTHAR THUG CING PHUL DU BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

This particular state of wisdom is the ultimate high quality among all the high qualities there are.  And that’s because each & every one of the extraordinary qualities of the different types of close awareness, and the like, reach their fullest and most perfect expression at this point.


[4121]
DE NI MTSUNGS PA MED PA YANG YIN TE, DE DANG ‘DRA BA MED PA’I PHYIR DANG, GONG NA MED PA’I PHYIR RO,,

These achievements are, moreover, beyond all equal; because there is nothing like them, and nothing above them.


[4122]
TSIG RKANG DANG PO’I ‘GYUR NI ‘GREL PA DANG BSTUN NA SNGAR BSHAD PA LTAR ‘ONG DGOS LA, TSIG RKANG GNYIS PA LA NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, SLAR YANG STOBS BCU BSKYED PA’I SNGON GYIS DER ‘BAD BA MDZAD GYUR PA, ZHES ‘BYUNG BA LTAR LEGS SO,,

If we interpret the first part of the verse here in accordance with the autocommentary, it comes out as we have already explained it here.  As for the second part of the verse, it comes out better if we follow the translation of Naktso, which reads: “That one from before undertakes to make continued efforts here, to give birth to the ten forces.”


[4123]
‘OG MIN KHO NAR ZHES GSUNGS PAS NI SNGAR SANGS MA RGYAS PA GSAR DU ‘TSANG RGYA BA’I RTEN LA ‘OG MIN PA DGOS PAR STON LA, SNGON SANGS RGYAS ZIN GSAR DU ‘TSANG RGYA BA’I TSUL STON PA ‘DOD PA KHAMS SU MDZAD PA YIN TE, PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I THEG PA’I LUGS SO,,

When we use the expression “only in the One Below No Other,” what we are indicating is that a person who has never achieved Buddhahood before must first attain this state in a body & mind located in the level of Below No Other.  If though a person has already achieved enlightenment, and is going to pretend to reach it anew, then they do so in the desire realm.  That is, at least, according to the way of the perfections.


[4124]
‘OG MIN DU DANG POR ‘TSANG RGYA BA NA, BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS SKAD CIG GCIG KHO NA LA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES BRNYES PAR STON PA NI,

The next lines here are meant to convey the idea that—when we do first become enlightened, in the paradise Below No Other—this Conqueror attains the wisdom of knowing all things in but a single instant of time.


	[4125]
[afterword.11]
Sanskrit unavailable

,JI LTAR SNOD KYI DBYE BAS MKHA’ LA
DBYE BA MED DE LTAR,
,DNGOS BYAS DBYE BA ‘GA’ YANG DE NYID
LA MED DE YI PHYIR,
,RO MNYAM NYID DU YANG DAG THUGS SU
CHUD PAR MDZAD GYUR NA,
,MKHYEN BZANG KHYOD KYIS SKAD CIG GIS NI
SHES BYA THUGS SU CHUD,

		Now there are
		Types of vessels,
		
		But no distinctions
		In these spaces.

		The case is the same;
		There are no distinctions

		At all engendered
		By functional entitites.

		And thus it is
		With suchness,
		Being a single song.

		This is something
		That you can
		Discern perfectly;

		As such,
		Those of you with
		Excellent understanding

		Can, in even
		Just a moment,
		Grasp all

		The knowable things
		In the universe.


[4126]
JI LTAR TE DPER NA BUM PA DANG ‘KHAR GZHONG LA SOGS PA’I SNOD KYI MI ‘DRA BA’I DBYE BA DU MA YOD KYANG, MI ‘DRA BA’I DBYE BA DE YIS SNOD DE DAG TU GTOGS PA STE DER KHYAB PA’I NAM MKHA’ LA NI, SGRIB PA THAMS CAD BKAG TZAM DU MTSUNGS PA’I PHYIR, DE LAS GZHAN PA’I DBYE BA MED PA

Now there are many different types of vessels, such as a water pitcher or a bronze bowl.  But let’s consider what is contained in all those different kinds of vessels: the empty space that overarches them all.  All these empty spaces are exactly the same, in the sense that each of them is the simple absence of physical obstruction.  That is, there are no other distinctions to be made here.


[4127]
DE LTAR DU GZUGS DANG TSOR BA LA SOGS PA LA DNGOS PO STE RANG GI RGYU RKYEN GYIS BYAS PA’I DBYE BA MI ‘DRA BA DU MA YOD KYANG,

The case is the same with functional things like our physical form, or our feelings.  It is true, first of all, that there are many different distinctions among these objects, from the point of view of each of them having been produced by its own causes & conditions.


[4128]
DE DAG [f. 270b] TU GTOGS PA DE RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I SKYE BA MED PA’I DE KHO NA NYID LA, DNGOS POS BYAS PA’I DBYE BA ‘GA’ YANG MED PA DE’I PHYIR DE KHO NA NYID NI RO MNYAM PA STE RO GCIG KHO NAR SHES PAR BYA’O,,

If though we consider the suchness of these objects—the fact that they are devoid of anything included into them which could exist through any nature of its own—we can say that there are no distinctions at all here that were engendered by any functional entities.  And thus it is that you should understand that, with suchness, everything “tastes the same,” meaning that it is all but a single song.


[4129]
RO MNYAM DE YANG MKHYEN PA’I SKAD CIG GCIG KHO NAS YANG DAG PAR THUGS SU CHUD PAR MDZAD PAR GYUR PAS NA, MKHYEN PA BZANG PO CAN KHYOD KYIS SKAD CIG GIS NI SHES BYA THAMS CAD THUGS SU CHUD PA’I YE SHES BRNYES SO,,

This fact of being a single song is something that even just a single millisecond of true knowledge can discern perfectly.  As such, those of you possessed of excellent understanding can—in even just a moment—come to find that wisdom which grasps, in their entirety, all the knowable things in the universe.



An argument against
how we reach enlightenment

[4130]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, PHYOGS SNGA MA DGOD PA DANG, LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our scond part from above, which is refuting argument about the way in which we first reach our enlightenment.  We cover this in two sections: phrasing the position of the other party, followed by its refutation.


	[4131]
[afterword.12]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GANG TSE ZHI BA DE NYID YIN NA
DE LA BLO GROS ‘JUG MI ‘GYUR,
,BLO MA ZHUGS PAR SHES BYA’I YUL CAN
NGES PAR RIGS PA’ANG MA YIN LA,
,KUN NAS SHES MED PA NI SHES PAR
JI LTAR ‘GYUR TE ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR,
,MKHYEN PO MED PAR KHYED KYIS GZHAN LA
‘DI LTA’O ZHES SU ZHIG STON,

		The point where
		Putting it to rest
		Is the true nature
		Of things

		Is something
		In which
		Intelligence
		Could never engage.

The idea that
A subject state of mind
		Could never engage

		Is not something
		That could ever
		Make sense

		With engagement
		In knowable objects.

		It would be a
Complete contradiction
To posit some state

Of knowing where you
Had no comprehension.

You have yet
To give rise to
A state of mind,

But you say
You will go
And teach it
Like this
To anyone else.


[4132]
RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA NI GZUGS LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID DO, ZHES RNAM PAR ‘JOG CING DE YANG BLOS SHES PA YIN NO ZHES ‘JOG NA,

And so suppose one comes with the following objection:

You have set forth, as your position, the idea that the fact that nothing can start through any nature of its own is the essential nature of form and other types of entities.  And you have stated, in addition, that this is something that can be known by the mind.


[4133]
GANG GI TSE RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA ZHI BA NI, DE KHO NA NYID DO ZHES RNAM PAR ‘JOG PA DE’I TSE,

Now consider this point at which you have posited putting to its rest the idea that things could arise through some nature of their own, and referring to this state as the true nature of things.


[4134]
YUL DE LA RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU BLO GROS TE SHES RAB MI ‘JUG PAR KHAS BLANG DGOS TE, ‘DI LTAR RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA’I DE KHO NA NYID LA BLO DE ‘JUG PA NA, BLO DE YUL CI’I RNAM PA CAN CIG TU ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR RO,,

You would, then—at the same time—have to accept the fact that intelligence (which is to say, wisdom) could never engage in this particular object in any manner at all.  And this is because—if the mind were to engage in a true nature of things where nothing could ever grow through any quality of its own—one would have to ask the question of which object’s aspect this mind could ever assume.  Because, it could never in fact do that.


[4135]
DE’I PHYIR YUL GYI RNAM PA GANG YANG ‘CHAR BA MED PAS DE KHO NA NYID LA BLO MI ‘JUG GO

As such, we would have to say that there was no object aspect that made its appearance here at all.  And if that were true, then the mind could never engage in some true nature of things.


[4136]
,YUL CAN GYI BLO YUL LA MA ZHUGS PAR NI SHES BYA’I YUL BLOS NGES PAR RIGS PA’ANG MA YIN PAS,

The fact is though that the idea that a subject state of mind could never engage in any object of perception is not something that could ever make sense with the engagement of the mind in any of the knowable objects there are.


[4137]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON ‘DI YONGS SU SHES PAR ‘GYUR BAR JI LTAR ‘OS, 

And how then could it ever be appropriate to speak of coming to some thorough understanding of the meaning of suchness?


[4138]
YONGS SU SHES PA MED PA NI DE KHO NA NYID SHES PA’O, ZHES BYA BAR MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR TE,

Because the simple reason for that is that it would be inappropriate for you to come and say, “The complete absence of complete understanding is what comes and grasps the true nature of things.”


[4139]
YUL KUN NAS SHES PA MED PAR NI SHES PAR JI LTAR ‘GYUR TE ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR BA’I [f. 271a] PHYIR RO,,

And that’s because it would be a complete contradiction to posit some state of knowing where you had no comprehension of anything!


[4140]
DE KHO NA NYID LA ‘JUG PA’I SEMS SKYE BA STE ‘BYUNG BA MED NA YANG, DE KHO NA NYID MKHYEN PA PO MED PAR ‘DI LTA BU’I MTSAN NYID CAN GYI DE KHO NA NYID NGAS THUGS SU CHUD DO ZHES KHYED KYIS GDUL BYA GZHAN DAG LA SU ZHIG GIS STAN PAR BYED PA

And so here you are, going around saying that you have comprehended, completely, a suchness like this, and that now you will have to go and teach it to anyone else—any disciple—that you can find.  That is, even though you have yet to give rise to any state of mind where you are engaging in suchness—even though it just hasn’t happened yet for you—you are going around describing some state of things with certain characteristics when as yet there is no one here who actually comprehends suchness.


[4141]
RIGS TE MI RIGS SO ZHE NA,

Is that something you’d say was logical?  Because it certainly doesn’t seem logical to us!



Refuting the idea
that realizing suchness
is mistaken

[4142]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA MI ‘THAD PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA, MKHYEN PA PO MI ‘THAD PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: our actual refutation of argument on the way in which we first reach our enlightenment.  Here we proceed in two steps: refuting argument which says that the idea of realizing suchness is mistaken; and then refuting argument which says that our idea about the one who gains the knowledge in this case is mistaken as well.


	[4143]
[afterword.13]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GANG TSE SKYE MED DE NYID YIN ZHING
BLO YANG SKYE BA DANG BRAL BA,
,DE TSE DE RNAMS STEN LAS DE YIS
DE NYID RTOGS PA LTA BU STE,
,JI LTAR SEMS NI GANG GI RNAM PA
CAN [216b] DU ‘GYUR BA DE YIS YUL,
,DE YONGS SHES PA DE BZHIN THA SNYAD
{%add NYE BAR} BRTEN NAS RIG PA YIN,

		Let’s consider that point
		When this is being
		Its suchness

		And, just so,
		The mind is devoid
		Of any starting.

		At this point,
		Their resting upon
		Is as though
The realization
		Of suchness.

		Let’s say
		That a particular
		State of mind
		
		Has taken on
		The aspect.

		This is it
		Having a
		Comprehension
		Of the object [f. 216b].

		Just so
		We refer to
		A knowledge
		
		In reliance upon
		The nominal.


[4144]
‘JIG RTEN ‘DI NA SHES PA YUL DE’I RNAM PA’I RJES SU BYED PA NYID ‘DZIN PA NA, SHES PA DES YUL DE RIG PAR BRJOD DE,

Now in this world, if a state of mind grasps to a particular object, through the very act of following its particular aspects, then we say that this mental state has known the object in question.


[4145]
JI LTAR TE DPER NA SEMS NI YUL SNGON PO GANG GI RNAM PA CAN DU SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA NA, SEMS DE YIS YUL SNGON PO DE YONGS SU SHES SO ZHES BRJOD PA

Let’s say for example that a particular state of mind arises which has taken on the aspect of blue.  This is itself what we refer to as “it,” the mind, having a comprehension of the object, blue.


[4146]
DE BZHIN DU YUL CAN GYI SHES PA YUL DE KHO NA NYID JI ‘DRA BA DE ‘DRA BA’I RNAM PA CAN DU SKYE BA NA, THA SNYAD KYI BDEN PA LA BRTEN NAS DE KHO NA NYID RIG PA YIN NO ZHES NYE BAR GDAGS SO,,

Just so is it when a subject state of mind arises with the aspect of suchness, reflecting the state of that object.  And then we refer to this as a knowledge of suchness which has occurred in reliance upon nominal reality.


[4147]
SHES PA DE KHO NA NYID KYI RNAM PA’I RJES SU BYED TSUL NI, GANG GI TSE RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA YUL GYI DE KHO NA NYID YIN ZHING STE YIN PA

How is it then that the mind takes on the aspect of suchness?  Let’s consider that point in time when the object of the mind is being—or is—its suchness: the fact that things cannot start through any nature of their own.


[4148]
BZHIN DU, DE’I YUL CAN GYI BLO YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA DANG BRAL BA’I RNAM PA CAN DU CHU LA CHU BZHAG PA BZHIN DU ZHUGS PA

Just so, the subject state of mind here has an aspect of being devoid of any starting through some nature of its own.  As such, the situation is the same as when we pour water into a glass which already has some water in it.


[4149]
DE’I TSE, YUL DE’I RNAM PA STEN PA STE ‘DZIN PA NYID LAS, DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR ‘JOG PA’I PHYIR SNGAR GYI RTZOD PA’I SKYON MED DO,,

At this point, the resting upon or the very holding of this aspect is established as the realization of suchness.  As such, our presentation is free of the faults that you are arguing it possesses.


[4150]
NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, DE TSE DE’I DE NYID RTOGS PA DE’I RNAM PA ‘DZIN PA NYID YIN TE, ZHES ‘BYUNG BA LTAR LTA BU MED PA DAG PA YIN NO,,

The translation of Naktso reads, “at this point, the realization of the real nature of it is quite certainly holding its aspect.”  That is, we don’t see the wording “as though” in his version.  This reading is the accurate one.


[4151]
‘DIR RANG ‘GREL LAS, [f. 271b] DE’I PHYIR BTAGS PA LAS DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS SO ZHES RNAM PAR BZHAG GI ,DNGOS SU NA ‘GA’ ZHIG ‘GA’ ZHIG GIS SHES PA NI MA YIN TE, SHES PA DANG SHES BYA GNYIS KA YANG MA SKYES PA NYID KYI PHYIR RO,

At this juncture, the autocommentary reads:

As such, the way we describe it is by saying, “Suchness is realized through labeling.”  It is not the case that some number of things are perceived by some number of things directly.  And that’s because neither the state of mind nor what it knows displays any kind of starting at all.


[4152]
ZHES GSUNGS PA’I BTAGS PA LAS ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NI, THA SNYAD BRTEN NAS RIG PA YIN, ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR RANG GI NGO BO NYID KYIS RIG PA MIN PAR BTAGS PA TZAM LAS RIG PAR ‘JOG PA’I DON YIN GYI, DE KHO NA NYID RIG PA BTAGS PA BAR ‘JOG PA MIN NO,,

How then do we understand the expression “through labeling” here?  As the line goes, “We perceive based on a term.”  That is, the meaning of “perceiving” here is established only as occurring through labeling; we do not perceive things through some essential nature of their own.  It is not though that we are here establishing the perception of suchness itself as something labeled.


[4153]
DNGOS SU NA ZHES SOGS KYI DON NI SPROS BRAL GYI RNAM PA SHAR BA CES LAS RIG PA MIN PAR SNGO SER SOGS KYI RNAM PA ‘DRA BA CIG SHAR NAS RIG PA MIN TE,

When the autocommentary mentions “directly” at this juncture, it is not the point that the perceiving occurs through an aspect of being free of all elaboration making its appearance.  It is not that we are here perceiving things in a way similar to how the aspect of blue or of yellow might make its appearance.


[4154]
YUL DE KHO NA NYID MA SKYES PA YIN PA BZHIN DU, YUL CAN YANG RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA’I RNAM PA CAN YIN PAS SO ZHES PA’I DON NO,,

Rather, what’s being said here is that the object of suchness is something that has never started and—just so—the subject state of mind too is something with an aspect of not having started, through any nature of its own.


[4155]
DE LTAR NA PHYOGS SNGA MA SMRA BA POS BLO LA DE KHO NA NYID KYI RNAM PA ‘CHAR RGYU MED PA DANG, YUL DE’I RNAM PA MA SHAR NA BLO YUL LA MI ‘JUG PA DANG, MA ZHUGS NA YUL DE MI SHES PA DANG, MA SHES NA YUL CAN DE SHES PAR ‘GAL LO ZHES SMRA BA’I

And so what those who take the former position are saying is that the aspect of suchness is not something that could ever make its appearance to the mind.  And if the aspect of the object could never make its appearance, then the mind could never engage in the particular object.  And if the mind did not engage, then it could never perceive this object.  And if it could not, then it would be a contradiction to say that this subject state of mind were mind at all.


[4156]
YUL GYI RNAM PA MA SHAR NA BLO MI ‘JUG PA LA SOGS PA RNAMS RANG YANG DE LTAR ‘DOD PAS, DE LA LAN MI ‘DEBS PAS BLO LA DON DAM BDEN PA’I RNAM PA ‘CHAR RGYU MED PA BKAG NAS,

We as well would agree that if no aspect of the object ever made its appearance, then ideas like the mind failing to engage would indeed follow.  And so rather than offering a response to that idea, we undertake to deny the idea that no aspect of ultimate reality could ever make its appearance to the mind.


[4157]
DE’I RNAM PA BLO LA ‘CHAR BA DANG, DE SHAR BA LAS YUL DE RTOGS PAR ‘JOG CES DPE DANG BCAS PAR GSUNGS PAS,

And so what we describe is a situation where just such an aspect is indeed making its appearance to the mind, and where we establish that one perceives this object through its having made such an appearance—and we add a metaphor for this as well.


[4158]
LUGS ‘DI LA DON DAM BDEN PA RTOGS PA’I MI RTOG YE SHES MED PAR SMRA BA NI, ‘PHAGS PA’I RTOGS PA MCHOG LA [f. 272a] SKUR BA ‘DEBS PA YIN NO,,

As such, when in the system described they claim that there is no such thing as a non-conceptual state of wisdom which realizes ultimate reality, they are in fact discrediting the supreme realization of The Arya.


[4159]
‘DIR SKAD CIG GIS NI SHES BYA THUGS SU CHUD, CES SKAD CIG GCIG KHO NAS THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES BRNYES PA DANG, JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES KYIS RIG BYA RIG BYED DNGOS  SU THA DAD PA’I TSUL DU SNANG NAS MI MKHYEN PAR GSUNGS PA RNAMS LA,

Now let’s go back to the line where it said, “In even just a moment, we grasp all the knowable things in the universe”; the point being that we achieve the state of omniscience in but a single instant of time.  And what this is also saying is that it is not the case that the wisdom which realizes the way things really are achieves this realization through the object of the state of mind, and the state of mind itself, appearing directly as separate entities.


[4160]
SANGS RGYAS KYIS JI LTA BA DANG JI SNYED PA MKHYEN TSUL LEGS PAR SHES DGOS PAR SNANG BAS, MDOR BSDUS PA CIG BRJOD PAR BYA’O,,

Given such pronouncements, it would appear that we need to make a special effort to come to a really good understanding of how a Buddha knows both the way that all things are, and the total quantity of the things there are.  As such, I will describe this topic here, in brief.



How Buddhas know all things,
and the way of all things

[4161]
‘DI LA SANGS RGYAS MA THOB PAR {%BAR} DU BLO GCIG GIS SKAD CIG MA GCIG LA CHOS CAN SO SOR SNANG BA DANG, CHOS NYID GNYIS KA DNGOS SU MKHYEN PA MI ‘ONG BAS DE GNYIS MKHYEN PA RES ‘JOG TU ‘ONG NGO,,

On this point, we can begin by saying that—until such time as a person becomes a Buddha—it is not possible for their mind, in a single moment of time, to perceive—directly—both the individual appearance of selected objects and the true nature of these objects.  As such, at this point our perception of these two things has to occur in a successive manner.


[4162]
BDEN ‘DZIN GYI BAG CHAGS MA LUS PA ZAD DE SANGS RGYAS PA NAS DUS RTAG TU DON DAM BDEN PA MNGON SUM DU RTOGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG LA BZHUGS PAS, DE LAS BZHENGS PA’I MNYAM RJES RES ‘JOG MED PA’I PHYIR DANG,

Then comes a point when we are able to finish off all of the deep seeds for the tendency to hold things as being real, and reach our own enlightenment.  From this time on, we are forever in a deep meditation where we are perceiving, directly, ultimate reality.  As such, we no longer engage in a successive state, in the sense of first being in deep meditation and then coming out into what is termed the “aftermath” of that meditation.


[4163]
BDEN GNYIS RANG ‘GREL LAS,
,MKHYEN PA’I SKAD CIG GCIG GIS NI,
,SHES BYA’I DKYIL ‘KHOR KUN KHYAB CAN,

The autocommentary to The Two Realities puts it this way—

A single second
Of this knowledge

Embraces the entire globe
Of things that could
Ever be known.


[4164]
ZHES GSUNGS PA LTAR YIN PAS MNYAM GZHAG GI YE SHES DE LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PA’I RJES THOB KYI YE SHES MED PA’I PHYIR NA, YE SHES GCIG GIS BDEN PA GNYIS KYI SHES BYA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAR ‘DOD DGOS SO,,

Given that things are the way these lines describe them, there is no “aftermath” state of knowledge that perceives the total quantity of knowable things and is also essentially discrete from the wisdom of deep meditation, at this point.  As such, we would have to take the position that it is possible for a single state of high wisdom to perceive all knowable objects subsumed by both realities.


[4165]
GANG GI TSE CHOS NYID LA LTOS TE JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES SU SONG BA DE’I TSE BLO DE’I NGOR GNYIS SU SNANG BA THAMS CAD NYE BAR ZHI BAS YE SHES DE CHU LA CHU BZHAG PA BZHIN DU RO GCIG TU ZHUGS [f. 272b] PA YIN LA,

Now there is a point where, relative to the real nature of things, our state of mind becomes the wisdom which knows the way in which things are.  At this juncture, all appearances of things as being dual have been put to a complete rest.  Our high knowledge at this point has gone into the fact of a single song—like water poured into water.


[4166]
GANG GI TSE CHOS CAN LA LTOS TE JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PAR SONG BA DE’I TSE, YUL YUL CAN SO SOR SNANG BA’I GNYIS SNANG YOD KYANG, GNYIS SNANG ‘KHRUL BA’I BAG CHAGS DRUNGS PHYUNG BAS SNANG YUL LA MA ‘KHRUL BA’I GNYIS SNANG YIN GYI ‘KHRUL BA’I GNYIS SNANG MIN TE, ‘DI MA ‘KHRUL BA’I TSUL GZHAN DU LEGS PAR BSHAD ZIN TO,,

At some point, relative to the object at hand, our state of mind passes into the knowledge of all the things there are.  At this stage, there is present a duality in the sense of the object and the subject state of mind appearing as two different things.  By now though we have torn out, from its very roots, the deep seed for error involving duality.  As such, we can say that here we have a sense of duality which is not mistaken about the object which is appearing to it; but which is not that sense of duality which is in error.  The exact way in which this mental state is not mistaken is something that I have covered quite nicely elsewhere.


[4167]
SANGS RGYAS KYI SAR MNYAM GZHAG DANG RJES THOB KYI YE SHES GNYIS KA YOD PAR NI RGYUD BLA MA LAS,

The point that, at the level of a Buddha, we possess both types of wisdom—the one which is in deep meditation, and the one which is subsequent to that state—is described in The Higher Line as follows—


	[4168]
,SHES RAB YE SHES RNAM GROL RNAMS,
,GSAL DANG ‘PHRO DANG DAG PHYIR DANG,
,THA DAD MED PHYIR ‘OD DANG ZER,
,NYI MA’I DKYIL ‘KHOR RNAMS DANG MTSUNGS,

Wisdom, high knowledge,
And complete freedom

Are the same as the light,
And the shining,
And the purity;

So too because
They are nothing separate,

They are equivalent
To the light,
And the rays,
And the very disk of the sun.


[4169]
ZHES PA’I ‘GREL PAR DE LA SANGS RGYAS KYI RGYUD LA MNGA’ BA’I ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA’I SHES RAB NI, SHES BYA’I DE KHO NA NYID DAM PA’I MUN PA SEL BAR NYE BAR GNAS PA’I PHYIR, ‘OD GSAL BA DANG CHOS MTSUNGS SO,,

The commentary to these lines puts it this way:

The wisdom possessed in the mindstream of an Enlightened Being—the type which is no longer perceiving things in any mistaken way—exists in a manner where it acts to clear away that ultimate form of darkness: the one that obscures the suchness of knowable things.  As such, it is comparable to shining light.


[4170]
DE’I RJES LA THOB PA SHES BYA THAMS CAD KYI YE SHES NI SHES BYA’I DNGOS PO MA LUS PA RNAM PA THAMS CAD LA ‘JUG PAS NI ‘OD ZER GYI DRA BA ‘PHRO BA DANG CHOS MTSUNGS SO, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

The state of wisdom which is attained subsequent to that first wisdom is the high knowledge of all existing entitites.  It engages in each and every knowable entity in every possible manner, and so it is comparable to the sending out of a vast net of light rays.


[4171]
‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA NI MNYAM GZHAG YIN LA, DE YANG DE KHO NA NYID LA LTOS NAS ‘JOG PA NI DE KHO NA NYID DAM PA ZHES SOGS KYI DON NO,,

That state of mind beyond the world, no longer seeing things in a mistaken way, refers to deep meditation; and where this is established relative to suchness, it is the “highest” form of suchness.  This and the like explain the wording here. 


[4172]
RJES LA THOB PA ZHES PA’I RJES KYI DON NI, MNYAM BZHAG LAS LANGS PA’I RJES ZHES DUS SNGA PHYI’I RJES MIN GYI, MNYAM GZHAG DE’I STOBS KYIS THOB PA’AM BYUNG BA’I DON NO,,

Now when we say that something is “attained in the aftermath,” what exactly is the “aftermath” here?  When we refer to “the aftermath of rising out of deep meditation,” the emphasis of the term “aftermath” is not to indicate that one thing is happening after another.  Rather, the point is that something is attained, or occurs, due to the power of the deep meditation.


[4173]
SHES BYA ZHES SOGS KYI DON NI RJES THOB KYI YE SHES DE SHES BYA JI SNYED PA THAMS CAD LA [f. 273a] ‘JUG PA’I SGO NAS ‘JOG PA’O,,

And when they talk about “existing entities” here, the point is that the wisdom attained in the aftermath engages in each and every existing entity, or knowable thing—in the exact total number that there are.


[4174]
DES NA CHOS CAN LA LTOS TE JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA MIN LA, CHOS NYID LA LTOS TE JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PA MIN NO,,

As such, the knowledge of the way that all things are is not something that is established relative to the entity with the quality; and neither is the knowledge of the total amount of things established relative to the real nature of things.


[4175]
DON ‘DI LEGS PAR SHES NA BDEN GNYIS LAS
,BRTAGS PA’I NGO BOS DBEN PA YIS, 
,JI LTAR SNANG BA ‘DI KHO NA,
,BRTEN TE SKYES PA THAMS CAD NI,
,THAMS CAD MKHYEN PAS MNGON SUM GZIGS,
ZHES DANG,

If we have a good understanding of this point, then we can grasp the import of the following lines from The Two Realities:

	Everything that arises
	Through dependence,

	And that very thing
	Where objects appear
	
	As if they were devoid
	Of being labeled

	Is seen directly
	By the state of all-knowing.


	[4176]
,GANG TSE SHES DANG SHES BYA DANG,
,BDAG NYID RJES SU MI MTHONG BA,
,DE TSE MTSAN MA MI ‘BYUNG PHYIR,
,GNAS PA BRTAN PHYIR MI BZHENGS SO,

And so too with this other verse:

	When one no longer
	Sees any combination
	Of knowing
	And what is known,

	Then the signs of things
	No longer appear.

	And because the way
	A person stays is then firm,
	They no longer arise.


[4177]
ZHES SANGS RGYAS KYIS SNANG BA JI SNYED PA THAMS CAD MNGON SUM DU MKHYEN PA DANG, YANG GNYIS SU SNANG BA’I TSUL GYIS SHES PA DANG SHES BYA GANG YANG MI MTHONG BAR GSUNGS PA DANG,

What this is saying is that an Enlightened Being knows, directly, the total amount of things that ever appear.  At the same time though, they see nothing—neither knowing nor what is known—in a manner where these appear in a dualistic way.


[4178]
CHEN PO GZHAN DAG GIS KYANG DE DANG ‘DRA BAR GSUNGS PA RNAMS LA, SHES PA DANG SHES BYA GANG YANG MI MTHONG BA SANGS RGYAS RANG SNANG GI DBANG DU BYAS SHING, SHES BYA THAMS CAD MNGON SUM DU GZIGS PA GDUL BYA GZHAN SNANG GI MKHYEN TSUL YIN PAS,

Other great thinkers too have made the same sort of statements; and then we can say about these pronouncements that not seeing any state of mind, or anything known, at all relates to how things appear to the Buddha themselves; and then being able to see all existing entities directly relates to the way in which this being sees things appearing as something other to disciples.


[4179]
SANGS RGYAS KYI SAS BSDUS PA’I YE SHES MED CES ZER MI DGOS PAR YE SHES GCIG NYID YUL GNYIS LA LTOS TE, MKHYEN TSUL MI ‘DRA BA GNYIS ‘ONG BA LA ‘GAL BA CUNG ZAD KYANG MED PAR SHES PA’I PHYIR RO,,

As such, there is no need for making a claim that there is no state of wisdom at all which is taken in by the level of an Enlightened Being.  That is, one should understand that there is not the slightest contradiction in saying that we can get two different ways of no more than a single state of wisdom knowing things, relative to two different objects of knowledge.


[4180]
‘O NA DNGOS KUN YANG DAG BRDZUN PA’I MTHONG BA YIS, ZHES SOGS KYIS BDEN PA GNYIS KYI MTSAN NYID BSTAN PA DANG, RNAM GZHAG ‘DI GNYIS ‘GAL BAR ‘GYUR RO SNYAM NA,

One may return here with the following assertion—

Earlier on in the root text, we had that verse about “seeing what is pure, and what is a lie,” and so forth, presenting definitions for the two different kinds of reality.  But don’t that explanation, and the one found here, contradict each other?


[4181]
MI ‘GAL TE BDEN GNYIS KYI MTSAN NYID SNGAR BSHAD [f. 273b] PA NI SPYIR BTANG LA DGONGS LA, SANGS RGYAS KYI YE SHES KYI MKHYEN TSUL NI SA BCU PA MAN CHAD DANG, THUN MONG MA YIN PA DMIGS BSAL GYI DBANG DU BYAS PA YIN PA’I PHYIR RO,,

And yet in fact there is no contradiction here.  The definition presented earlier for the two realities was meant only to be a general description; it was made only with reference to the way in which the high knowledge of a Buddha does its knowing at the tenth level on down; and so it was treating a special case, not something typical.


[4182]
DE’I PHYIR SANGS RGYAS KYI MKHYEN TSUL YANG BSDUS PA’I DBANG DU BYED NA NI YANG DAG PA MTHONG BA’I RIGS SHES TSAD MAS RNYED PA DANG, YUL DE LA RIGS SHES TSAD MA YIN PA NI, DON DAM BDEN PA’I MTSAN NYID YIN LA, DES KUN RDZOB BDEN PA’I MTSAN NYID KYANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

And so suppose we were to give a more inclusion description of how it is that an Enlightened Being does their knowing.  Let’s think about how the knowledge that sees total purity locates its object, with an accurate perception.  And saying that this is a knowledge of that object which is an accurate perception should be understood as a definition relative to ultimate reality—but as offering a definition of deceptive reality as well.


[4183]
DE BZHIN DU JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES KYIS RNYED CING YUL DE LA JI LTA BA MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES SU SONG BA DANG, JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES KYIS RNYED CING YUL DE LA JI SNYED PA MKHYEN PAR SONG BA’I SGO NAS, YUL SO SO LA LTOS NAS KUN RDZOB DANG DON DAM MKHYEN TSUL YANG SHES PAR BYA’O,,

In the same way, the wisdom which knows the way in which things are locates the object, and then becomes wisdom towards that object which knows the way things are.  And this wisdom that knows all the things there are finds its objects, and then becomes the wisdom towards those objects that knows all things.  We should understand then the way that we know the deceptive and the ultimate relative to the respective objects.


[4184]
‘DIR SNGAR RANG RIG ‘THAD MI ‘THAD DPYAD PA BYAS PA’I RANG LUGS KYANG DRAN PAR BYA’O,,

At this juncture, we can as well recall the position that we ourselves took back when we were examining whether the concept of apperception was correct or not.



The actual point
on gaining knowledge

[4185]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, DNGOS KYI DON DANG, DE’I ‘THAD PA DNGOS BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

With this we have come to our second point from above: refuting argument which says that our idea about the one who gains the knowledge in this case is mistaken as well.  This we present in two sections: the actual point, and then a direct demonstration of how it is correct.  Here is the first. 


[4186]
GANG YANG KHYOD KYI LUGS LTAR NA MKHYEN PA PO MED PAR GDUL BYA GZHAN LA DE KHO NA NYID NI ‘DI LTA BU’O ZHES SU ZHIG GIS STON ZHES BRJOD PA DE LA YANG LAN BRJOD PAR BYA STE,

One might start with the following question:

According to your system, if there were no one who had done the knowing, then who is it that would sit and teach someone else—a disciple—that “here is what this suchness is like”?   And we are ready to give you an answer on that point here.


[4187]
SANGS RGYAS KYI SA’I DE KHO NA NYID ‘JAL BA’I SHES PA ‘DI YUL RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA’I DON DAM DANG RO GCIG TU ZHUGS PA BDEN MOD KYANG, ‘JIG RTEN NA DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA MI SRID PA YANG MIN NO, ,DE JI LTAR ZHE NA,

Now let’s admit that—at the level of an Enlightened Being—this knowledge that holds suchness under its consideration is engaging, in a single song, along with its object: the fact that there is nothing which ever starts through any nature of its own.  Even so, you say that it is not an impossibility—even in the everyday world—that people could realize suchness.  Just how is that?


[4188]
RTZOD PA ‘DI’I DON NI DE KHO NA NYID LA RO GCIG PA’I TSUL GYIS RTAG TU BZHUGS PA YIN NA, CHOS STON PA’I KUN [f. 274a] SLONG GI RNAM RTOG DANG BCAS PA’I STON PA PO MED LA, DE MED NA CHOS STON PA MED CES PA’I DON YIN TE,

The point of this particular argument is as follows.  There can be no one who is doing teaching who—if they are remaining at all times inside of emptiness, in the manner of a single song—could also entertain a normal thought where they were motivated to teach the Dharma.  And if they could not, then there could be no teaching of the Dharma.


[4189]
‘DI’I ‘OG NYID NAS RNAM RTOG MED KYANG CHOS STON PA ‘THAD PA’I LAN GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR,

We see then the immediately following verse, which is meant to express an answer describing how—even without having a normal thought—someone could indeed teach the Dharma.


	[4190]
[afterword.14]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE YI LONGS SPYOD RDZOGS SKU BSOD NAMS KYIS,
,ZIN DANG SPRUL PA MKHA’ GZHAN LAS DE’I MTHUS,
,SGRA GANG CHOS KYI DE NYID STON ‘BYUNG BA,
,DE LAS ‘JIG RTEN GYIS KYANG DE NYID RIG

	The holy body
	Of this one
	
	Complete in
	Its enjoyments

	Is embraced
	By merit.

	And from
Emanated bodies

	From the sky
	And other things,

	Due to the mystic
	Power of these,
	
	The sound that
	Comes forth

	Teaches the
	Suchness of things.

	From this then
	The world

	Comes as well
	To know suchness.


[4191]
RTZOD PA ‘DI LA LAN BRJOD PAR BYA STE, SANGS RGYAS RNAMS GZUGS KYI SKU GANG LA BZHUGS NAS CHOS KYI DBYINGS CHOS KYI SKU MNGON SUM DU MDZAD PA’I SANGS RGYAS

Here then is the answer that we would give to this argument.  Here is what happens after the Buddhas have entered their holy body of form, and then make their holy body of the Dharma—the realm of all things—manifest.


[4192]
DE YI GZUGS KYI SKU NI, BSOD NAMS KYI TSOGS BRGYA PHRAG DU MAS ZIN PA STE MNGON PAR ‘DU BYAS PA’I BSAM GYIS MI KHYAB PA SNA TSOGS PA’I GZUGS MNGA’ BA,

The physical body of this Enlightened Being is “embraced”—which is to say, brought together—by many millions of collections of merit.  Thus it is that they possess a form with many different variations of inconceivable good qualities.


[4193]
BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYI CHOS KYI LONGS SPYOD KYI RGYUR GYUR PA’I LONGS SPYOD RDZOGS PA’I SKU YIN PAS, SKU DE LAS SGRA GANG ZHIG ‘BYUNG BA CHOS KYI DE KHO NA NYID STON PA

This is the holy body which is “complete in its enjoyments,” in the sense that it provides the cause for the bodhisattvas to enjoy the experience of the Dharma.  The sound that comes forth from this holy body teaches the suchness of things.


[4194]
DE LAS ‘JIG RTEN TE GDUL BYA CHOS DE LTA BU NYAN PA’I SNOD DU GYUR PAS KYANG DE KHO NA NYID PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR RIG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And it is from this then that the “world”—referring here to disciples—who are worthy vessels to listen to just such a teaching of the Dharma come as well to know suchness, in an unerring manner.


[4195]
BSOD NAMS BRGYAS BSKYED PA’I SKU LAS DE LTAR ‘BYUNG BA LTA ZHOG ,LONGS SKU DE’I BYIN RLABS KYIS SPRUL PA DANG,

And it is not only from the holy body produced by millions of good deeds that these kinds of teachings come forth.  There are further, first of all, the bodies that are emanated through the blessings of this body of enjoyment.


[4196]
DE TZAM DU MA ZAD KYI GZHAN YANG SPRUL PA DE YI MTHUS NAM MKHA’ DANG, GZHAN RTZVA DANG SHING DANG RTZIG PA DANG BRAG LA SOGS PA SEMS MED PA LAS SGRA GANG ZHIG CHOS KYI DE NYID STON PA ‘BYUNG BA DE LAS KYANG GDUL BYA RNAMS KYIS DE KHO NA NYID RIG PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And not only that.  Teachings also come forth, due to the mystic power of these emanations, from the sky and from “other things”—which includes for example the simple grass, or trees, or the walls of buildings, or caves: things without their own mind, each one making their own sound.   And these sounds give forth teachings on the very nature of all things; and from that, disciples come to understand suchness itself.



The one who gains knowledge

[4197]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second section from above: a direct demonstration of how our position about the person who gains knowledge is correct.


[4198]
YANG JI LTAR SEMS DANG SEMS BYUNG GI RNAM RTOG MED PA NI, DE LTAR STON PA’I DUS DA LTA KUN SLONG GI BYA BA MI SRID KYANG, CHOS STON PA’I BYA BA ‘BYUNG BA’I RGYUR ‘GYUR SNYAM NA,

The following question then might occur to one.  Here we have a mind, and mental functions, that are without any kind of conceptual thought; and so in the time that things like those we’ve described happen, it is impossible—in the present moment—for there to be any activity of motivation.  And yet still these mental entities act as a cause for the occurrence of the activity of teaching the Dharma.


[4199]
DE BSTAN PA’I PHYIR DPE DGOD PA NI,

In order to clarify this point, we the following metaphor is presented.


	[4200]
[afterword.15]
Sanskrit unavailable

,JI LTAR RDZA MKHAN STOBS CHEN LDAN PAS ‘DIR,
,YUN RING CHES ‘BAD PAS BSKOR ‘KHOR LO NI,
,DE’I RTZOL DE {%DA?} LTAR SKYES PA MED BZHIN DU’ANG,
,’KHOR ZHING BUM PA LA SOGS RGYUR MTHONG LTAR,

		It’s like how
		Here, a potter
		
		Possessed of great
		Strength puts forth
		Great effort.

		Even though for
		Quite some time

		They have made
		No current efforts,

		We can see it
		Still spinning,

		Acting as a cause
		For a pot or the like.


[4201]
JI LTAR TE [f. 274b] DPER NA ‘JIG RTEN ‘DIR RDZA MKHAN STOBS CHEN PO DANG LDAN PAS ‘BAD PA CHEN POS BSKOR BA’I ‘KHOR LO NI, DE ‘DAS NAS YUN RING DU SONG BAS RDZA MKHAN DE’I ‘KHOR LO BSKOR BA’I ‘BAD RTZOL DA LTA SKYES PA MED BZHIN DU’ANG, ‘KHOR LO DA ‘KHOR ZHING RDZA BUM LA SOGS PA’I RGYUR MTHONG BA LTAR,

It’s like how—here in the everyday world—a potter who is possessed of great strength puts forth great effort to spin their potter’s wheel.  And then even though quite some time may have passed during which the potter is making no current efforts to spin their wheel, even after the original effort is long gone we can see that this same wheel is still spinning, and still able to act as a cause for a new clay pot, or the like.


	[4202]
[afterword.16]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE BZHIN DA LTA SKYES RTZOL MED BZHIN DU,
,CHOS KYI BDAG CAN SKU NYID LA BZHUGS DE’I,
,’JUG PA SKYE BO’I DGE DANG SMON LAM GYI,
,KHYAD PAR GYIS ‘PHANGS LAS CHES BSAM MI KHYAB,

		In the same way,
		There is no longer
		Conscious effort

		Which has arisen in
		The present moment;

		At the same time though
		Their engagement continues,

		Residing as they are
		In an identity

		Consisting of
		The holy body
		Of all things.

		The good deeds
		Of beings,

		And their
		Extraordinary prayers,

		Project—and
		From that, it is
		Far beyond
		Any imagining.
		 

[4203]
DE BZHIN DU SANGS RGYAS PA’I TSE DA LTA SKYES PA’I ‘BAD RTZOL GYI RTOG PA MED BZHIN DU, CHOS KYI SKU’I BDAG NYID CAN NYID LA BZHUGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS DE’I ‘PHRIN LAS ‘JUG PA NI,

In the same way, once one has reached enlightenment, there is no longer any conceptual thought, conscious effort, which has arisen in the present moment.  At the same time though the holy activity of this Enlightened Being—residing as they are in an identity consisting of the holy body of all things—continues with their engagement.


[4204]
YID BZHIN GYI NOR BU DANG DPAG BSAM GYI SHING DANG ‘DRA BAR, SANGS RGYAS LAS DE ‘DRA BA’I CHOS THOS PAR ‘GYUR BA’I LAS YONGS SU SMIN PA’I DGE BA GDUL BYA’I SKYE BOS BSAGS PA DANG,

What happens then is similar to what occurs with a wish-giving gem, or a tree that fulfils all of ones wishes.  That is, there is a certain power to the good deeds that beings who are disciples have accumulated; and there is a full ripening of their karma to hear, from an Enlightened Being, certain specific teachings.


[4205]
SANGS RGYAS KYIS SNGON BYANG SEMS GYI SKABS SU SMON LAM KHYAD PAR CAN BTAB PA’I MTHUS ‘PHANGS PA STE SHUGS LAS YIN PAS, CHES SHIN TU BSAM GYIS MI KHYAB PA YIN NO,,

Moreover, the extraordinary prayers that this Buddha has made previously—during the time when they themselves were a bodhisattva—are able to project their power.  As such, from this tremendous force, the ripening is far beyond any imagining.


[4206]
SMON LAM JI LTA BU ZHE NA,

And just what kind of prayers are the ones that are made here?


[4207]
JI LTAR ‘TSAM PAR SEMS CAN GYI DON SGRUB PA LHUR MDZAD CING, CHOS KYI DBYINGS LAS SKAD CIG KYANG MI BSKYOD LA, SEMS CAN GDUL BA’I DUS LAS KYANG MI ‘DA’ BA DE ‘DRA BAR BDAG KYANG GYUR CIG ,CES PA’O,,

In these prayers, we have said to ourselves:

There are those who are able, spontaneously, to serve the needs of all living beings, in just the right way.  And at the same time, they never budge from the realm of all things, even for a moment.  Moreover, they never shift out of that period during which they are working to tame living beings.  May I too become like them!


[4208]
‘DIR DE’I SHAS {%SHES} BYED KYI MDO DRANGS PA NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS ‘BYUNG NGO,,

If you would like to see the sutra passages that provide the source for this description, you can find them in the translation of Naktso.



The holy body of all things

[4209]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, SKU’I RNAM GZHAG DANG, STOBS KYI YON TAN GYI RNAM GZHAG GO

Which brings us to our second point from above: a description of the holy body, and the fine qualities, that we then achieve.  We proceed in two sections: a presentation of the holy bodies; and then a description of the fine qualities of the forces.


[4210]
,DANG PO LA GSUM, CHOS KYI SKU DANG, LONGS SPYOD RDZOGS PA’I SKU DANG, RGYU MTHUN PA’I SKU BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

The first of these we cover in three parts of its own: an explanation of the holy body of all things; an explanation of the holy body complete in all enjoyments; and an explanation of corresponding holy bodies.  Here is the first of these.


[4211]
DE NI CHOS KYI SKU’I DBANG DU BYAS NAS BSHAD PA,

The next part of the root text then relates to holy body of all things.


	[4211]
[afterword.17]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SHES BYA’I BUD SHING SKAM PO MA LUS PA,
,BSREGS PAS ZHI DE RGYAL RNAMS CHOS SKU STE,
,DE TSE SKYE BA MED CING ‘GAG PA MED,
,SEMS ‘GAGS PAS DE SKU YIS MNGON SUM MDZAD,

		The dry firewood of
		Each and every one of
		The knowable objects
		Is burned;

		And the peace
From that is
		The holy body
		Of all things.

		At this point, it is
Without any starting,
And without any stopping.

They have put a stop
To the mind; as such,

		This is manifested directly
		By the holy body.


[4212]
YUL CAN YE [f. 275a] SHES KYI RANG BZHIN TE BDAG NYID CAN GYI SKU GNYIS SU SNANG BA’I SHES BYA’I YUL BUD SHING SKAM PO DANG ‘DRA BA MA LUS PA, YE SHES ME DANG ‘DRA BAS BSREGS PA LAS,

Let us consider first the two holy bodies whose identity consists of the nature of the subject state of high knowledge.  Each and every one of the knowable objects, all objects of perception, that there are make their appearance to these two, in a manner where they resemble dry firewood.  And then these are burned by that high knowledge which is like to the fire.


[4213]
SHES BYA RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA JI ‘DRA BA DE ‘DRA BA’I RNAM PA CAN DU ZHUGS PAS, SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS MA SKYES PA DE’I RNAM PA CAN DANG LDAN PAR GYUR BA’I DE KHO NA NYID ZHI BA DE NI RGYAL BA RNAMS KYI CHOS KYI SKU’O,,

This knowledge engages in the things it knows in a manner which reflects the fact that no knowable entity ever starts through any nature of its own.  Thus then the suchness which reflects the fact that knowledge itself never began through any nature of its own—this state of peace—is the holy body of all things which belongs to the Victorious Buddhas.


[4214]
‘DI NYID KYI DBANG DU MDZAD NAS RDO RJE GCOD PA LAS,
,SANGS RGYAS RNAMS NI CHOS NYID LTA,
,’DREN PA RNAMS NI CHOS KYI SKU,
,CHOS NYID SHES BYA MA YIN TE,
,DE NI SHES PAR NUS MA YIN,

It is in this context that the Diamond Cutter Sutra says,

The Buddhas view the nature of things;
Our guides are the bodies of reality.

Those for whom this nature of things
Is beyond the things they know
Will never be able to know things.


[4215]
ZHES SANGS RGYAS RNAMS NI DUS KUN TU CHOS NYID LA LTA BA STE DE LA MNYAM PAR BZHAG PA DANG, ‘DREN PA RNAMS KYI DON DAM PA’I SKU NI CHOS KYI SKU DANG, CHOS NYID DE MKHYEN PA NA’ANG GNYIS SU SNANG BA’I TSUL GYIS SHES PAR BYA BA MIN PAR GSUNGS SO,,

What this is saying is that the Buddhas are—at every moment—"viewing” the true nature of things; which is to say, they are in deep meditation upon this nature.  We also learn that the ultimate body of these guides is their holy body of all things; and that their ability to know the very nature of things is not, however, something that does its knowing in a way where things appear in a disparate way.


[4216]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI CHOS KYI SKU ‘DI NI, DE’I TSE SKYE BA MED CING ‘GAG PA MED PA STE ‘DI’I DBANG DU MDZAD NAS, ‘JAM DPAL SKYE BA MED CING ‘GAG PA MED PA ZHES BYA BA ‘DI NI, DE BZHIN GSHEGS PA’I TSIG BLA DAGS SO ZHES MDO SDE LAS GSUNGS SO,,

This body of all things, of suchness, is—at this point—without any starting, and without any stopping.  And it is with respect to this fact that we see in sutra the statement:

O Manjushri, the expression “nothing starts and nothing stops” is just another way of saying “Those Gone Thus.”


[4217]
DE LTAR NA SANGS RGYAS KYI SAR YE SHES KYI YUL DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON LA, RNAM PA THAMS CAD DU DE’I YUL CAN GYI SEMS DANG SEMS LAS BYUNG BA’I RNAM RTOG ‘GAGS SHING MI ‘JUG PAS, RNAM PAR MI RTOGS {%RTOG} PA’I YE SHES DANG DE KHO NA NYID GNYIS CHU LA CHU BZHAG PA BZHIN DU DBYER MED PAR ZHUGS SO,,

Thus it is that—at the level of a Buddha—the subject state of mind, and mental functions, operate in a way where they have put a stop to all conceptual states of mind, in a state of high knowledge which no longer engages in that way, in any manner at all, in the object of perception which is the fact of suchness.  As such, the Buddha enters into high knowledge “which is no longer thinking,” and suchness here—these two—engaged indivisibly, like water poured into water.


[4218]
DE’I PHYIR GO ‘PHANG DE NI DANG POR LONGS SPYOD [f. 275b] RDZOGS PA’I SKU YIS MNGON SUM DU MDZAD PA STE BRNYES PAR KUN RDZOB TU RNAM PAR BZHAG GO ,NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS DE’I SHES BYED DU PHYIR MI LDOG PA’I ‘KHOR LO’I MDO DRANGS PA SNANG NGO,,

And so this enlightened state is first “manifested” directly—which is to say, achieved—by the holy body which is complete in all enjoyments; it is established in a deceptive manner.  In the translation of Naktso, it would appear that he is referencing the Sutra of the Unstoppable Wheel in support of this description.


[4219]
SEMS ‘GAGS PA ZHES GSUNGS PA’I DON NI, TSIG GSAL LAS, MDO LAS, DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA GANG ZHE NA, GANG LA SEMS KYI RGYU BA YANG MED NA, ,YI GE RNAMS LTA SMOS KYANG CI DGOS, ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

Just what does this expression—“stopping the mind”—refer to?  A Clarification of the Verses puts it this way:

We see the following in sutra: “And just what is ultimate reality?  It is that towards which the mind never runs; and so what need to mention, as well, words?”


	[4220]
[afterword.18a]
Sanskrit unavailable

,ZHI SKU DPAG BSAM SHING LTAR GSAL GYUR ZHING,
,YID BZHIN NOR BU JI BZHIN RNAM MI RTOG

	We have peace
	And the holy body:

	We are crystal-clear,
Similar to the tree
That fulfils all wishes;

		And like the
		Wish-giving jewel,
		We have no
		Conceptual thought.


[4221]
DE LTAR NA RNAM PAR RTOG PA MED PA YIN NO, ZHES SEMS KYI RGYU BA RNAM RTOG MED PA LA GSUNGS PA DANG,

As such, when we see the expression “there is no longer thinking,” what it’s referring to is that there is no running of the mind in a conceptual way.


[4222]
‘DIR RANG ‘GREL LAS KYANG, ZHI BA’I DON SEMS SEMS BYUNG DANG BRAL BA LA BSHAD NAS, ZHI BA DE YIN YANG SEMS CAN GYI DON MDZAD NUS PA GSAL BAR BYED PA’I DPER,

The autocommentary on this point also explains the meaning of “peace” as being free of mind and mental functions.  And then it goes on to a metaphor to clarify how it is that—nonetheless—we are still capable of acting on behalf of living beings.


[4223]
DPAG BSAM GYI SHING DANG YID BZHIN GYI NOR BU BKOD PA’I MTHAR, ‘DI RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA YIN DU ZIN KYANG, DPAG BSAM GYI SHING DANG YID BZHIN GYI NOR BU LTAR, ZHES RNAM RTOG GI SEMS SEMS BYUNG DANG BRAL BA LA GSAL BAR GSUNGS PAS,

The work first gives a description of the examples of a tree that fulfils all our wishes, or else a wish-giving gem.  And then at the end there it speaks of how—even though these objects are ones without any kind of thought—we are similar here to the tree that fulfils all wishes, and the wish-giving jewel, in that we are “crystal-clear”; meaning that we are free of any conceptual thought, in mind or mental functions.


[4224]
SANGS RGYAS LA YE SHES MED PA’I KHUNGS SU ‘DREN PA NI GZHUNG GI DON MA RTOGS PA’I SKUR ‘DEBS CHEN PO’O,,

As such, when we see people quoting this section as the source for some idea that the Buddhas possess no high knowledge, this is a grave philosophical debasement where they have failed utterly to understand the import of the text.



The holy body
complete in enjoyments

[4225]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from above: an explanation of the holy body complete in all enjoyments.  


[4226]
SKU GANG GIS CHOS SKU MNGON DU MDZAD PA’I LONGS SKU ‘DI NI, SEMS SEMS BYUNG GI RTOG PA DANG BRAL BAS NA ZHI BA’I SKU’O,,

The body that we employ to actualize the holy body of all things is the body of enjoyments.  And because this latter is devoid of any conceptual thought involving mind and mental functions, we call it the “holy body of peace.”


[4227]
DE LTAR RNAM PAR MI RTOG PA YIN YANG SEMS CAN GYI DON MDZAD PAR NUS PA GSAL BAR BYED PA NI, DPAG BSAM GYI SHING LTA BU DANG, YID BZHIN GYI NOR BU JI BZHIN DU RNAM PAR MI RTOG PAR GDUL BYA’I ‘DOD PA’I DON SGRUB PA’I RGYU NYID DU ‘GYUR RO,,

This holy body never entertains any normal kinds of thoughts; but still we make it crystal-clear that it is still capable of working for the good of beings.  What happens is that this body acts as a perfect cause for achieving all the goals that disciples may wish for, in a way that resembles a tree which grants our every wish; or which is comparable to a wish-giving jewel.  Which is to say, there is no normal thinking process involved.


	[4228]
[afterword.18b]
Sanskrit unavailable

,’GRO GROL BAR DU ‘JIG RTEN ‘BYOR SLAD RTAG
,’DI NI SPROS DANG BRAL LA SNANG BAR ‘GYUR,

		This is free of
		All elaboration,

		And makes its
		Appearance always

		In order to serve
		The world,
		
		Until living beings
		Are liberated.
		

[4229]
SKU ‘DI NI ‘GRO BA THAMS CAD GROL GROL GYI BAR DU [f. 276a] GDUL BYA’I ‘JIG RTEN GYI ‘BYOR BA’I SLAD DU, RTAG TU YUN RING POR GNAS PA YIN NO,,

This particular holy body remains in the world “always”—meaning, for a very long time—in order to serve the world of our disciples, until such time that each & every one of all the living beings there are is absolutely liberated.


[4230]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN JI SRID PA DANG NAM MKHA’ JI SRID PA DE SRID DU SANGS RGYAS RNAMS TSUL ‘DIS, SEMS CAN GYI DON KHO NA MDZAD CING RNAM PAR BZHUGS SO,,

Thus this way of the Enlightened Ones, which goes on for as long as the world does, and remains for as long as space itself does, is entirely all about fulfilling the needs of living beings, and remaining here for that.


[4231]
LONGS SKU ‘DI NI BYANG SEMS SPROS PA DANG BRAL BA STE, RANG GI TSOGS GNYIS LAS SHES RAB DRI MA MED PA’I ME LONG THOB PA’I SA THOB PA RNAMS KHO NA LA SNANG BAR ‘GYUR GYI,

This body of enjoyment represents a Wish for enlightenment which is free of all elaboration; and it only makes its appearance to those individuals who have reached a level where they have attained the mirror of a completely spotless state of high knowledge, due to their accumulation of the two collections.


[4232]
SPROS PA DANG BCAS PA SO SKYE RNAMS LA NI DNGOS SU SNANG BA MA YIN NO,,

This body though is not something which can make its appearance, directly, to common beings, involved as they are with elaboration.


[4233]
SKYABS ‘GRO BDUN CU PA LAS KYANG,
,SANGS RGYAS NYID KYI GZUGS KYI SKU,
,MTSAN DANG DPE BYAD DAG GIS ‘BAR,
,’GRO BA RANG GI MOS PA YIS,
,DBANG GIS SNA TSOGS SKU ‘DZIN GANG,

The Seventy Verses on Going for Refuge puts it this way—

	The holy body
	Of physical form
	Belonging to a truly
	Enlightened Being

	Blazes in the
	Signs and marks.

	These beings
	Take on a body
	According to the various
	Wishes of living beings.


	[4234]
,BSOD NAMS TSOGS NI TSAD MED LAS,
,’KHRUNGS PA DE NI RGYAL BA’I SRAS,
,SA BCU LA NI GNAS RNAMS KYIS,
,MTHONG BAR GYUR NA SKU DE YIS,
,CHOS KYI RDZOGS LONGS SPYOD ‘DI NI,
,RGYAL BA RNAMS KYI SPYOD PA YIN,
ZHES GSUNGS SO,,

	This body is born
	Of an infinite
Collection of merit;

And it is seen by
Children of the Victors
Residing at the
Tenth of the levels.

As such,
This body of enjoyments
Complete in the Dharma

Is the activity of
The Victorious Ones.



Everything from a single pore

[4235]
GSUM PA LA GSUM, SKU DANG BA SPU’I KHUNG BU GCIG TU RANG GI SPYOD PA KUN STON TSUL DANG, GNAS DER GZHAN GYI SPYOD PA KUN STON TSUL DANG, BZHED PA LA MNGA’ BSGYUR BA PHUN SUM TSOGS PA BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NA {%NI},

With this we have reached our third part from above—an explanation of corresponding holy bodies.  This we cover in three sections of its own: their holy body, and the way in which they display all of their activities within a single pore of their body; the way in which they display all the activities of others in that location; and an explanation of how they have the perfect power to carry out their wishes.  Here is the first of these.


[4236]
CHOS KYI SKU ‘AM SNGAR BSHAD PA’I GZUGS SKU’I MTHU LAS BYUNG BA YANG RUNG STE,

The next section is meant to explain the following.  We are talking now about a holy body which will have come about through the mystic power of the holy body of all things, or else that of the physical body described earlier here.


[4237]
SNGAR BSHAD PA’I LONGS SKU LAS GZHAN DU GYUR PA SPRUL PA’I SKU’I NGO BO NYID CHOS LONGS KYI RGYU MTHUN PA STE ‘BRAS BU’I SKU GANG DAG, 

And it is something different from the holy body of enjoyment; it is the holy body of emanation, which has an essential nature where it is a resulting body, with the bodies of all things and enjoyment acting as its concordant cause.


[4238]
SEMS CAN ‘DUL BA’I RGYUS BYUNG BA DE DAG LA YANG MTHU’I KHYAD PAR BSAM [f. 276b] GYIS MI KHYAB PA BRJOD PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

It has appeared due the cause of seeking to tame living beings; and as we will see here, its forms possess a certain feature of power—which is completely inconceivable.


	[4239]
[afterword.19]
Sanskrit unavailable

,THUB DBANG DUS GCIG KHO NAR
DE’I RGYU MTHUN,
,GZUGS SKU GCIG LA RANG GI
SKYE GNAS SKABS,
,SNGAR ‘GAGS GSAL DANG MA ‘CHOL
BYUNG TSUL NI,
,MA LUS KYIS BKRA MTHA’ DAG
STON PAR MDZAD,

		The Lord of the Able
		Has a certain
		Physical embodiment,
		Through its
		Concordant cause—

		The occasions of
		Ones past rebirths
		Come to their end.

		They are displayed
		With great clarity,
		And without
		Any jumbling,

		In every one
		Of the ways
		They occurred
		In the past;

		And so all
		Are resplendent.

		They are moreover
		Displayed all
		At the same time.


[4240]
THUB PA’I DBANG POS CHOS LONGS KYI SKU DE’I RGYU MTHUN PA’I GZUGS SKU GCIG LA, ‘KHOR BA THOG MA MED PA NAS KYI RANG GI SKYE BA’I GNAS SKABS DA LTA ‘GAGS ZIN PA SNGON GYI BYUNG BA’I MTHA’ MA LUS PA BSTAN PA’I PHYIR,

Now the Lord of the Able Ones possesses a certain physical embodiment, which comes about through its concordant cause of the holy bodies of all things, and of enjoyment.  And it is capable of displaying all the infinite forms that one has assumed during the entire circle of suffering, which has no beginning end to it; that is, the forms of all those occasions of ones past rebirths—which by the present time have already come, each one, to their end.  


[4241]
GSAL BA DANG MA ‘CHOL BA STE PHAN TSUN MA DRES PAR, SNGAR GYI BYUNG TSUL NI MA LUS PAS BKRA BA MTHA’ DAG

And these forms are displayed with great clarity, and without any “jumbling”—meaning that they in no way overlap with each other.  The forms are presented in every one of the ways they occurred in the past; and so all are resplendent.


[4242]
,ME LONG SHIN TU DAG PA LA GZUGS BRNYAN LTAR DUS GCIG KHO NAR LHUN GYIS GRUB PAR STON PAR MDZAD DO,,

And these forms are, moreover, displayed spontaneously, and all at the same time—like reflections in some perfectly clear mirror.


	[4243]
[afterword.20]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SANGS RGYAS ZHING JI ‘DRAR THUB
DBANG DE DANG,
,DE DAG SKU SPYOD MTHU STOBS
JI ‘DRA DANG,
,NYAN THOS DGE ‘DUN JI SNYED
JI LTA DANG,
,BYANG CHUB SEMS RNAMS DER GZUGS
JI ‘DRA DANG,

		The Buddha paradise
		Of the Lords of the Able
		Is just right;

		And the mystic
		Power and force
		Of the activities
		
		And the holy bodies
		Of these comes
		In just the right way;

		And the community
		Of the listeners
		Is in just
		The right number,

		And devote themselves
		Just right.

		And the bodhisattvas
		Possess physical forms
		In just the right manner.


[4244]
BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KYIS SNGON SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN LA SPYOD PA NA, SANGS RGYAS GANG LA BSNYEN BKUR GANG MDZAD PA DANG,

Now a Conqueror has, in days gone before, spent much time practicing the perfection of giving.  They have paid endless honor to endless Enlightened Beings.


[4245]
SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHING BEE d’U R+YA LA SOGS PA’I RIN PO CHE’I RANG BZHIN CAN CHU ZHENG KUN NAS ZLUM PA DANG, DE LA BRTEN PA’I BCUD KYI SEMS CAN GYIS MDZES PA JI ‘DRA BA ZHIG NA, THUB PA’I DBANG PO BLTAMS PA SOGS STON PAR MDZAD PA DANG,

And so these Lords of the Able Ones act as if they are taking birth, and so on, upon the expanse of this perfectly global plane, so much like a Buddha paradise, composed of precious materials such as lapis lazuli and the like—adorned as well in the beauty of the living creatures who occupy this sphere, in just the right way.


[4246]
SANGS RGYAS DE DAG GI SKU DANG SPYOD PA’I MTHU DANG STOBS PHUL DU BYUNG BA JI ‘DRA BA DANG, DE DAG GI ‘KHOR NYAN THOS KYI DGE ‘DUN ‘DUS PA JI SNYED PA DANG,

And the mystic power and magnificent force of the activities and the holy bodies of these Enlightened Beings comes in just the right way; and they are surrounded by a gathering of disciples—the community of the listeners—in just the right number.


[4247]
CHOS LA NAN TAN GANG BYAS PAS DGE ‘DUN DER GYUR PA JI LTA BA STE JI ‘DRA BA DANG,

And this community makes just the right devoted efforts in practicing the Dharma that they are taught.


[4248]
SANGS RGYAS KYI ZHING DER BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS GZUGS MTSAN DPES SPRAS PA DANG, CHOS GOS DANG ZAS DANG GNAS LA SOGS PA NYE BAR SPYOD PA DANG LDAN PA JI ‘DRA BA DANG,

And the bodhisattvas here in this Buddha paradise possess physical forms that are emblazoned with just the right holy signs & marks; and they are employing—in just the right manner—their religious robes, and their sustenance, and their abodes and the like.


	[4249]
[afterword.21]
Sanskrit unavailable

,JI ‘DRA’I CHOS DANG DER BDAG JI ‘DRA DANG,
,CHOS THOS SPYOD PA GANG LA SPYAD PA DANG,
,SBYIN GANG JI TZAM DE DAG LA PHUL BA,
,DE NI MA LUS SKU GCIG LA STON MDZAD,

	And they teach
	Just the right Dharma;

	And there are
	Just the right number
	Of eminent beings;

	And there are those
	That listen to
	The Dharma,

	And engage in the
	Various activities.

	In a single
	Holy body,
	They display

	Acts of giving
	Presenting all this
	Just right.


[4250]
THEG PA GCIG DANG GSUM LA BRTZAMS NAS CHOS JI ‘DRA BA BSTAN PA DANG,

And they are teaching just the right Dharma—whether it starts off from a single track, or from all three tracks.


[4251]
ZHING DER BDAG NYID BRAM ZE LA SOGS PA’I RIGS SU SKYES PA BLO DANG LDAN PA KHYIM PA DANG, RAB BYUNG DU GYUR PA JI ‘DRA BA DANG,

And so there are just the right number of eminent beings who have been born into a high class within this world—as a Brahmin or the like; and who are persons of intelligence, whether they be householders or individuals who have left the home life.


[4252]
[f. 277a] CHOS THOS NAS BSLAB PA’I GZHI MA RDZOGS PA DANG RDZOGS PA’I BSLAB PA KHAS BLANGS TE, BYANG SEMS KYI SPYOD PA GANG LA SPYAD PA DANG,

And here there are those that listen to the Dharma and agree to train themselves in some part of the various trainings; while others agree to observe the entirety of the trainings; there are those who decide to engage in the various activities of the bodhisattva.


[4253]
SANGS RGYAS DANG BYANG SEMS DANG NYAN THOS DE DAG LA BZA’ BA DANG CHOS GOS DANG RIN PO CHE’I RGYAN LA SOGS PA’I SBYIN PA GANG DUS JI TZAM ZHIG TU DANG, TSAD JI TZAM ZHIG PHUL BA DE NI MA LUS PAR SKU GCIG LA STON PAR MDZAD DO,,

And so they undertake, in a single holy body, to display each and every one of these things: undertaking acts of giving to these Buddhas and bodhisattvas and listeners, presenting them with food to enjoy, and religious robes, and precious jewelry, and all the like.  And they do all this for just the right period of time, and in just the right measure.


	[4254]
[afterword.22]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE BZHIN TSUL KHRIMS BZOD BRTZON
TING ‘DZIN DANG,
,SHES RAB SPYOD TSE SNGAR GYI
GNAS SKABS GANG,
,MA TSANG MED DE DAG NYID
SPYOD PA KUN,
,SKU YI BA SPU’I KHUNG BUR’ANG
GSAL BAR STON,

		In the very same way,
		They undertake

		An ethical lifestyle;
		Patience; joyful effort;
		Single-pointed focus;
		And wisdom—

		Just as they did
		Before, with no
		Single detail left
		
		Incomplete
		In their practice,
		From the beginning.

		They display—
		With utmost clarity—

		All this very same
		Activity, from every
		Single pore of
		Their holy body.				


[4255]
DE LTAR SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN LAS BRTZAMS PA’I BYUNG BA’I MTHA’ STON PAR MDZAD PA 

And then we should make an addition to the description we have just made for the perfection of giving, and expand it.  Which is to say, these beings have then just made a display of undertaking the perfection of giving, and then reaching the final expression of this practice.


[4256]
DE BZHIN DU, TSUL KHRIMS DANG BZOD PA DANG, BRTZON ‘GRUS DANG BSAM GTAN GYI TING NGE ‘DZIN DANG, SHES RAB KYI PHAR PHYIN LA 

And then, in the very same way, they undertake to practice the perfection of an ethical lifestyle, and then the perfections of patience; joyful effort; single-pointed focus in the form of meditation; and wisdom.


[4257]
SNGON SPYOD PA’I TSE’I SNGAR GYI GNAS SKABS GANG MA TSANG BA MED PA DE DAG SKU GCIG LA STON PAR MDZAD DO, ZHES GONG DU SBYIN PA LA BSHAD PA DANG SBYAR BAR BYA’O,,

And thus they display, within a single holy body, all of those things just as they did before—with no single detail left incomplete in their practice, from the beginning.


[4258]
SKU GCIG LA CIG CAR DU GNAS SKABS THAMS CAD STON PA LTA ZHOG GI ,’ON KYANG SNGON GYI NYID KYI SPYOD PA KUN SKU YI BA SPU’I KHUNG BUR ‘ANG GSAL BAR STON PAR MDZAD DO,,

And you should not think that they display all these things—on all occasions—altogether in but a single holy body.  Rather, they display—with utmost clarity—all this very same activity that we have described before, but from every single pore of their holy body.



Other displays
from the pores

[4259]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from above: the way in which these beings display all the activities of others in that same location.


	[4260]
[afterword.23]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SANGS RGYAS GANG DAG ‘DAS DANG
‘BYUNG ‘GYUR GANG,
,GANG DAG DA LTAR NAM MKHA’I
MTHAR THUG PAR,
,GDANGS [217a] MTHON CHOS STON SDUG BSNGAL
GYIS BZUNG BA’I,
,’GRO DBUGS ‘BYIN ZHING ‘JIG RTEN
BZHUGS PA DANG,

		All of those
		Enlightened Beings
		Who are past,

		And who are
		Yet to come,
		And here in
		The present

		Teach the Dharma
		In a high song
		Which reaches to
The very ends of
Space itself [f. 217a].

They seek to bring
Comfort and relief
To beings in the
Grasp of suffering.


[4261]
SANGS RGYAS GANG DAG SNGAR ‘DAS PA DANG, MA ‘ONGS PA NA ‘BYUNG BAR ‘GYUR BA GANG DANG, SANGS RGYAS GANG DAG DA LTAR NAM MKHA’I MTHAR THUG PAR GSUNG GI GDANGS MTHON POS CHOS STON PAS,

All of those Enlightened Beings who are past—that is, up to this point; and all those who are yet to come in the future; and all those Buddhas who are here in the present teach the Dharma in a high song of holy speech which reaches to the very ends of space itself.


[4262]
SDUG BSNGAL GYIS BZUNG BA STE GZIR PA’I ‘GRO BA RNAMS DBUGS ‘BYIN ZHING ‘JIG RTEN NA BZHUGS PA DANG,

That is, they seek to bring comfort and relief to all those living beings who are tortured, in the grasp of suffering.  Thus then they come and reside in the world.


	[4263]
[afterword.24]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DANG PO’I THUGS BZUNG BYANG CHUB
SNYING PO’I BAR,
,DE DAG SPYOD KUN DNGOS RNAMS
MIG ‘PHRUL GYI,
,RANG BZHIN MKHYEN NAS BDAG BZHIN
BA SPU YI,
,KHUNG BUR DUS GCIG LA NI
GSAL BAR STON,

		From the very
		First day of
		The holy Wish,

		And up until
		They reside in the very
		Heart of Buddhahood,

		They undertake then
		All of their various
		Activities of service.

		And each one
		Of their activities
		Is repeated,

		Displayed altogether
		In every point in time,
		
		Within each & every
		Pore of their body.

		And they know
		That entities possess
		A quality of being
		Similar to an illusion.


[4264]
DANG PO’I THUGS BSKYED PA BZUNG BA NAS BYANG CHUB KYI SNYING PO’I BAR DUS GSUM GYI RGYAL BA DE DAG GI SPYOD PA KUN,

From the very first day that they were able to achieve the holy Wish for enlightenment, and up until they reside in the very heart of Buddhahood, the Victors of the past, present, and future undertake then all of their various activities of service to others.


[4265]
BDAG GI SPYOD TSUL KUN STON PA DE BZHIN DU, BA SPU YI KHUNG [f. 277b] BU GCIG TU DUS GCIG LA NI GSAL BAR STON PAR NUS TE,

And each one of these activities of theirs is repeated, being displayed altogether in every point in time, within each & every single one of the pores of their body.


[4266]
MIG ‘KHRUL MKHAN THA MAL PA ‘GA’ ZHIG GIS SNGAGS DANG RDZAS KYI MTHU TZAM ZHIG GIS KYANG, RANG GI LUS LA SNOD BCUD KYI RNAM PA SNA TSOGS PA STON PAR NUS NA,

There are everyday illusionists who—with no more than the power of some magic words and powders—have the ability to show, on their body, a whole variety of appearances, related to both the vessel of the outer world and the beings who constitute its contents.


[4267]
SANGS RGYAS DANG BYANG SEMS DNGOS PO RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN MIG ‘KHRUL GYI RANG BZHIN DANG BDEN BRDZUN KHYAD PAR MED PAR MKHYEN NAS DE BSKAL PA DU MAR GOMS PAR MDZAD PA RNAMS KYIS, RNAM ‘PHRUL DE RNAMS MDZAD MI NUS PAR ‘GYUR RAM STE MI ‘GYUR RO,,

Buddhas and bodhisattvas though know that the nature of entities is that they possess a quality of being similar to an illusion; and possess no distinction of being true or false.  And they have, further, habituated themselves to these facts over a period of many eons.  But if you think that this means that they would be incapable of producing all those emanations, that is not the case.


[4268]
DE’I PHYIR MKHAS PA SU ZHIG DE ‘DRA BA DE MI RTOG PA DANG, RTOGS KYANG THE TSOM ZA BAR ‘GYUR TE MI ‘GYUR TE, DPE ‘DI’I SGO NAS LHAG PAR MOS PAR BYA’O,,

Thus we can say that those of you who are individuals of wisdom should neither fail to imagine that such a thing could be, nor—even when you do understand it—continue to entertain any doubts about it.  Armed with an understanding of the metaphor we have offered, you should rather increase your aspiration for these things.


	[4269]
[afterword.25]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE BZHIN DUS GSUM BYANG CHUB
SEMS DPA’ DANG,
,RANG RGYAL ‘PHAGS PA NYAN THOS
MA LUS KYI,
,SPYOD DANG DE LHAG SKYE BO’I
GNAS SKABS NI,
,THAMS CAD BA SPU’I KHUNG BUR
GCIG TSE STON,

		The same is the case
		With the activities

		Of each & every one
		Of the bodhisattvas
		Of the past, present,
		And future;

		And with all the
		Realized beings who
		Are self-made buddhas,
		And listeners too.

		And there are
		All the rest;
		All they undertook
		During that period
		When they were
		Common beings—

		All this they display
		In a single one,
		Within a pore
		Of their body.


[4270]
JI LTAR NYID KYI SPYOD PA DANG SANGS RGYAS GZHAN GYI SPYOD PA RNAMS DUS GCIG TU BA SPU’I KHUNG BUR STON PAR MDZAD PA DE BZHIN DU,

And so it is the case that these very same kinds of activities—and all the various activities of an Enlightened Being—can be displayed by these holy beings all at the same time, and from every single pore of their skin.


[4271]
DUS GSUM GYI BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ DANG, DUS GSUM GYI RANG RGYAL ‘PHAGS PA DANG NYAN THOS MA LUS PA’I SPYOD PA DANG, DE RNAMS KYI LHAG MA SO SO SKYE BO’I GNAS SKABS KYI SPYOD PA THAMS CAD NI, BA SPU’I KHUNG BU GCIG TU DUS GCIG GI TSE STON PAR NUS SO,,

The same is the case with the activities of each & every one the bodhisattvas of the past, present, and future; and with all the realized beings who are self-made buddhas; and the listeners too.  And then we can add to these “all the rest”—referring to all the activities that they undertook during that period when they were common beings.  That is, they are able to display all of these in a single moment, within but a single pore of their body.



Carrying out their wishes

[4272]
GSUM PA NI,

Here then is our third section here: an explanation of how these beings have the perfect power to carry out their wishes.


[4273]
DE LTAR SKU GSUM PHUN SUM TSOGS PA BRJOD NAS RNAM RTOG MI MNGA’ YANG BZHED PA LA MNGA’ ‘AM DBANG BSGYUR BA PHUN SUM TSOGS PAR BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

Now that we have described all these perfectly excellent qualities of the three holy bodies, we present lines to speak of how—even though these beings possess no conceptual thought at all—they can still carry out their wishes: they still have a perfect capacity to do so.


	[4274]
[afterword.26]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DAG PA ‘DI NI BZHED PA
‘JUG PA YIS,
,RDUL GCIG YUL LA MKHA’ GTUGS
‘JIG RTEN DANG,
,’JIG RTEN MTHA’ YAS PHYOGS KHYAB
RDUL STON MOD,
,RDUL RAGS MI ‘GYUR ‘JIG RTEN
PHRA MI ‘GYUR,

		This thing
		Is cleaned;

		Engaging in the
		Wish to do so,

		Worlds extending
		To space are in
		A single atom.

		Admitted they can
		Display an atom
		Spreading to
		Infinite planets;

		But that atom
		Does not become
		More gross;

		Nor does that planet
		Become more fine.


[4275]
DRI MA MA LUS PAS DAG PA’I SANGS RGYAS KYI MDZAD PA ‘DI NI, BZHED PA TZAM GYI ‘JUG PA YIS TE DE’I SGO NAS NAM MKHA’ YI MTHAS GTUGS PA’I ‘JIG RTEN RNAMS RDUL PHRA RAB GCIG GI YUL GYI KHYON LA STON PAR NUS LA,

Let’s consider “this thing”: the holy deeds of an Enlightened Being, who has cleaned themselves of each & every impurity there is.  “Engaging in no more than the wish to do so”—that is, with nothing more than this, they are able to display these deeds in the “land” of but a single tiny atom of the entire quantity of worlds that extend to the very ends of space itself.


[4276]
[f. 278a] ‘JIG RTEN MTHA’ YAS PA STE MA LUS PA’I RTEN GYI KHYON, RDUL PHRA RAB GCIG GIS KHYAB PA YANG STON PAR MDZAD PA NA, RDUL GCIG PO DE RAGS PA CHE BAR YANG MI ‘GYUR LA, ‘JIG RTEN PHRA BA STE CHUNG BAR YANG MI ‘GYUR RO,,

And if they undertake to make such a display even in the space occupied by a single tiny atom upon an infinite number of planets—upon the surface of all the worlds there are—then that one atom does not become any more “gross,” any larger.  But neither as well does that planet itself become any more “fine,” which is to say, any smaller.


	[4277]
[afterword.27]
Sanskrit unavailable

,RNAM RTOG MI MNGA’ KHYOD KYIS
SRID MTHA’I BAR,
,SKAD CIG DE RE RE LA
SPYOD SNA TSOGS,
,JI SNYED STON PA DE SNYED
‘DZAM BU GLING,
,MA LUS RDUL GANG DE SNYED
LA GRANGS MED,

You are a being
Who possesses
No conceptual
Thought at all;

And yet
You undertake
A whole variety
Of activities,

In every single
Instant of time,

Even up until
The final moment
Of existence.

Just as you make
This one display,

You make the same
Upon all the planets,
Infinite in number,

Equal in count to
		That of all the atoms.


[4278]
DE BZHIN DU RNAM PAR RTOG PA MI MNGA’ BA KHYOD KYIS SRID PA ‘KHOR BA’I MTHA’I BAR DU, SKAD CIG DE RE RE LA SPYOD PA SNA TSOGS PA

Just so do you—that being who possesses no conceptual thought at all—undertake a whole variety of activities, in every single instant of time, even up until the final moment of “existence”; referring here to the duration of the cycle of pain.


[4279]
JI SNYED STON PA DE SNYED KYI GRANGS NI, ‘DZAM BU GLING MA LUS PA NA RDUL PHRA RAB KYI GRANGS GANG JI SNYED YOD PA DE SNYED KYI GRANGS LA MED DO,,

And just as you make this one display, you make the same displays upon the surface of all the planets there are—infinite in their number, for the count of your deeds is equal to that of the count of all the atoms in all worlds there are.


[4280]
SNGA MA NI YUL GYI DBANG DU BYAS LA, ‘DI NI DUS KYI DBANG DU BYAS PA’O,,

The previous case was a description relative to location; and this one here is a description relative to time.



The ten forces, in brief

[4281]
GNYIS PA LA BZHI, STOBS BCU MDOR BSTAN PA{%,} DE RNAMS RGYAS PAR BSHAD, YON TAN KUN BRJOD MI NUS PA’I TSUL, YON TAN GNYIS SHES PA’I PHAN YON BSTAN PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

This brings us to our second point from before—a description of the fine qualities of the forces.  Here we cover four topics: a brief presentation of the ten forces; a more extensive explanation of the same; a discussion of how it would be impossible ever to describe all these fine qualities; and a demonstration of the benefits of understanding the two kinds of fine qualities.  Here is the first.


[4282]
SANGS RGYAS KYI SA NI STABS {%STOBS} BCUS RAB TU PHYE BA’I PHYIR NA, DE’I RNAM PAR DBYE BA CHA TZAM ZHIG BSTAN PA’I PHYIR BSHAD PA,

That is, the following verses of the root text are meant to present just some portion of the various divisions of the forces of a Buddha, in order to indicate how the level of an Enlightened Being is distinguished by the fact that there are ten different forces there.


	[4283]
[afterword.28]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GNAS DANG GNAS MIN MKHYEN STOBS DANG,
,DE BZHIN LAS RNAM SMIN BLO DANG,
,MOS PA SNA TSOGS THUGS CHUD DANG,
,SNA TSOGS KHAMS NI MKHYEN STOBS DANG,

		There is the force
		Of knowing
		What is actual,
		And what is not;

		And, just so,
		The force of mind
		Of how different
		Karmas will open.

		Then there is
		Comprehending
		The variety of wishes;

		And the force
		Of knowing
		Different propensities.


[4284]
THUB PA’I STOBS LA NI, GNAS DANG GNAS MIN MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG, DE BZHIN DU LAS KYI RNAM PAR SMIN PA BLO STE MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG, MOS PA SNA TSOGS PA THUGS SU CHUD PA’I STOBS DANG, KHAMS NI SNA TSOGS PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG,

Here then are the forces of an Able One.  We start with (1) the force of knowing what is actual, and what is not; and, just so, (2) the force of the state of mind—or the understanding—where we know how different karmas will open.  Then there is (3) the force of comprehending the variety of different wishes that people might entertain; and (4) the force of knowing people’s different propensities.


	[4285]
[afterword.29]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE BZHIN DBANG MCHOG MCHOG MA YIN,
,MKHYEN DANG THAMS CAD DU ‘GRO DANG,
,BSAM GTAN RNAM THAR TING ‘DZIN DANG,
,SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG SOGS BLO STOBS DANG,

		In like manner
		We have the force
		Of understanding
		Higher or lesser
		Capacities; as well as

		The paths that lead
		To different goals;

		And understanding
		Concentration,
		Freedom,
		Single-pointed focus,
		
		Staying in deep
		Meditation, and others
		Of the like.


[4286]
DE BZHIN DU DBANG PO MCHOG DANG, MCHOG MA YIN PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG, THAMS CAD DU ‘GRO BA’I LAM MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG, 

In like manner we have (5) the force of understanding the higher or lesser capacities of individuals; as well as (6) the force of understanding the paths that lead to different goals.


[4287]
BSAM GTAN DANG RNAM PAR THAR PA DANG TING NGE ‘DZIN DANG SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG PA SOGS BLO STE MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG,

Then there is (7) the force of understanding—of knowing—topics such as concentration; and freedom; single-pointed focus; staying deep in meditation; and others of the like.


	[4288]
[afterword.30]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SNGON GNAS DRAN PA MKHYEN PA DANG,
,DE BZHIN ‘CHI ‘PHO SKYE BLO DANG,
,ZAG RNAMS ZAD PA MKHYEN STOBS TE,
,STOBS NI BCU PO ‘DI DAG GO

		So too there is
		The force of 
		Understanding
		Days gone by;

		And just so
		The state of mind
		Of the deaths of beings,

		And how they move on
		Or find their rebirth.

		And then finally
		There is the force
		Of understanding
		
		When the last
		Of the impurities
		Are finished off.

		These then
		Are the ten
		Different forces.


[4289]
SNGON GYI GNAS RJES SU DRAN PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG, DE BZHIN DU ‘CHI ‘PHO BA DANG SKYE [f. 278b] BA DANG GNAS PA BLO STE MKHYEN PA’I STOBS DANG,

So too there is (8) the force of understanding days gone by; and just so (9) the state of mind or knowledge of the deaths of beings, and how they move on or find their rebirth, and then their life to come.


[4290]
ZAG PA RNAMS ZAD PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS STE, STOBS NI BCU PO ‘DI DAG TU YOD DO,,

And then finally (10) there is the force of understanding when the last of the impurities are finished off.  This then brings us to a total of ten different forces that we can come to possess.



The five beginning
with knowing the actual

[4291]
GNYIS PA LA GNYIS, GNAS DANG GNAS MIN MKHYEN PA SOGS KYI STOBS LNGA BSHAD PA DANG, THAMS CAD DU ‘GRO BA’I LAM MKHYEN PA SOGS KYI STOBS LNGA BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us to our second point from above: more extensive explanation of the ten forces.  This we will discuss in two sections: an explanation of the five forces beginning with that of knowing what is actual, and what is not; followed by an explanation of the five forces beginning with that of knowing the paths that lead to every different kind of goal.  Here is the first.



1) The force of knowing
      what is actual, and what is not


	[4292]
[afterword.31]
Sanskrit unavailable

,RGYU GANG ZHIG LAS GANG ZHIG NGES PAR
SKYE ‘GYUR BA,
,DE NI DE YI GNAS SU DE MKHYEN
RNAMS KYIS GSUNGS,
,BSHAD PA LAS BZLOG GNAS MIN SHES BYA
MTHA’ YAS PA,
,MKHYEN PA THOGS PA SPANGS PA DE NI
STOBS SU BSHAD,

		Something has,
		Quite certainly,
		Arisen from
		A particular cause.

		Those who have
		A high grasp
		Of such things

		Have stated that
		This is the actuality.

		Anything happening
		In the opposite way
		Is not actual.

		Eliminating all stopping
		Towards knowing
		Infinite objects
		Of perception

		Is what we refer to
		As the force.


[4293]
RGYU GANG ZHIG LAS ‘BRAS BU GANG ZHIG NGES PAR SKYE BAR ‘GYUR BA’I RGYU DE NI ‘BRAS BU DE YI GNAS SU DE LTAR MKHYEN PA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYIS GSUNGS TE,

And so say that a particular result has, quite certainly, arisen from a particular cause.  The Buddhas—who have a high grasp of such things—have stated that this cause then is the actuality of the result.


[4294]
DPER NA MI DGE BA LAS RNAM SMIN YID DU MI ‘ONG BA ‘BYUNG BA DANG, ‘PHAGS PA SLOB PA’I LAM LAS MYANG ‘DAS ‘THOB PA LA SOGS PA’O,,

It’s like the examples of how unpleasant ripenings derive from non-virtue; or how realized beings attain nirvana from the paths of those who are still learning, and so on.


[4295]
DE LTAR BSHAD PA LAS BZLOG PA NI GNAS MIN PA ZHES BYA STE, DPER NA DGE BA LAS RNAM SMIN YID DU MI ‘ONG BA ‘BYUNG BA DANG,  MTHONG LAM THOB PAS LAS DBANG GIS SRID PA BRGYAD PA ‘GRUB PA NI GNAS MA YIN ZHING GO SKABS MED PA LTA BU’O,,

Anything that could happen in the opposite way from what we have described here then would be called what is “not actual.”  For example, it would not be actual (there would be no chance of it) if a virtuous action led to an unpleasant ripening; or if an individual had attained the path of seeing and then—due to the power of karma—were to experience an eighth rebirth afterwards.


[4296]
DE ‘DRA BA’I GNAS DANG GNAS MA YIN PA’I SHES BYA MTHA’ YAS PA MKHYEN PA LA THOGS PA SPANGS PA STE THOGS PA MED PA DE NI GNAS DANG GNAS MA YIN PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU BSHAD DO,,

Now suppose a person has “eliminated all stopping” towards knowing infinite objects of perception: these different types of reality and non-reality.  Which is to say, suppose their knowledge is unstoppable.  This then is what we refer to as the force of understanding both what is actual and what is not actual.


2) The force of knowing
    how different karmas will open


	[4297]
[afterword.32]
Sanskrit unavailable

,’DOD DANG MI ‘DOD DE LAS BZLOG DANG
ZAD DNGOS KYI,
,LAS DANG DE YI RNAM SMIN SHIN TU
SNA TSOGS LA’ANG,
,MKHYEN PA NUS MTHU THOGS MED SO SOR
‘JUG ‘GYUR BA,
,DUS GSUM SHES BYA KHYAB MDZAD DE NI
STOBS SU ‘DOD,

		There is what
		Is desirable
		And what is
		Not desirable;

		And then the
		Opposite of these.

		There are karmas
		Which are entities
		Which finish off;

		And the great variety
Of ripenings.

What we accept then
As the force is

The power of knowledge
Engaging in objects
In a way which is
Unstoppable;

Taken in by the
Past, present,
And future,

Extending to all
Knowable things [f. 217b].


[4298]
‘DOD PA STE DGE BA DANG MI ‘DOD PA STE LAS MI DGE BA STE MA ‘DRES PA GNYIS DANG,

And then next let’s consider “what is desirable”—a reference to virtuous deeds; and “what is not desirable”—referring to non-virtuous deeds.  There are instances in which these two are unadmixed.


[4299]
DE GNYIS LAS BZLOG PA STE LAS ‘DRES MA DANG, ZAG BCAS KYI LAS NGAN PA ZAD PAR BYED PA’I ZAG MED KYI DNGOS PO’I LAS RNAMS DANG, LAM DE’I RNAM SMIN SHIN TU MI ‘DRA BA SNA TSOGS PA LA’ANG,

And then there are cases of the opposite of these two; meaning that the karmas are mixed.  And then there are the karmas that represent entities which are immaculate—which in fact function to finish off negative karmas.  And then there are the great variety of different ripenings that are produced by this path.


[4300]
MKHYEN PA NUS MTHU THOGS PA MED PAR SO SOR ‘JUG PAR ‘GYUR BA, DUS GSUM GYIS BSDUS PA’I LAS DANG DE’I ‘BRAS BU’I SHES BYA [f. 279a] KUN LA KHYAB PAR MDZAD PA DE NI LAS KYI ‘BRAS BU MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU ‘DOD DO,,

What we accept then as being the force of knowing how different karmas will open is a case where the power of our knowledge engages in individual objects in a way which is unstoppable; we see the karmas and their results taken in by the entirety of the past, present, and future—and this knowing extends to all knowable things.


3) The force of knowing
   the variety of wishes


	[4301]
[afterword.33]
Sanskrit unavailable

,’DOD [217b] CHAGS SOGS KYIS ‘BYUNG BA’I STOBS KYIS
‘DOD PA NI,
,SHIN TU SNA TSOGS DMAN ‘BRING GANG YANG
KHYAD ‘PHAGS ‘DOD,
,DE LAS GZHAN RNAMS KYIS G-YOGS MOS LA
MKHYEN PA NI,
,DUS GSUM ‘GRO BA MA LUS KHYAB PA
STOBS SHES BYA,

		There are
Wishes which occur
		By force of desire
		And so on—

		An extremely
		Great number
		Of different wishes;

		Those lesser,
		The inbetween,
		And those which are
		Extremely elevated.

		And there are hopes
		By those different
		From these—

		Hopes which
		Are obscured.

		Here we have
		A knowledge
		Which travels

		To the three of
		The past, present,
		And future—
		Which covers all.

		This we refer to
		As the force.
		
		
[4302]
‘DOD CHAGS DANG DES MTSON NAS ZHE SDANG LA SOGS PA’I NYON MONGS DANG, SOGS KYIS BSDUS PA DAD PA LA SOGS PA RNAMS KYI ‘BYUNG BA STE SA BON GYI STOBS KYIS BSKYED PA’I ‘DOD PA NI,

Let’s consider first the occurrence of desire, and then the repulsion and other negative emotions that it represents.  Then too we have “and so on”—wishes which include faith and so on which “occur”; that is to say, are triggered, by the force of their seeds.


[4303]
SHIN TU MI ‘DRA BA SNA TSOGS PA DMAN PA DANG, ‘BRING DANG GANG YANG KHYAD PAR DU ‘PHAGS PA’I ‘DOD PA DANG,

And then there are an extremely great number of different—varying—wishes: lesser ones, inbetween ones, and those which are extraordinarily elevated.


[4304]
MOS PA DE LAS GZHAN PA’I CHOS KUN TU SPYOD PA RNAMS KYIS SNGAR BSHAD PA’I MOS PA’I SA BON G-YOGS PA STE BSGRIBS PA’I MOS PA LA’ANG,

And then there are hopes that beings have which are different from these other ones: these are hopes that are entertained by those who are trying to practice the Dharma, whose hopes are obscured, or wrapped in the seeds of the hopes mentioned so far.


[4305]
MKHYEN PA DUS GSUM DU ‘GRO BA STE ‘JUG PAS MOS PA’I SHES BYA MA LUS PA KHYAB PA NI, MOS PA SNA TSOGS PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS ZHES BYA’O,,

But here we have a knowledge which travels to the three of the past, present, and future; which covers all the different entities that one might ever hope for.  This then is what we refer to as the “force of perceiving all the various hopes.”



4) The force of knowing
     people’s different propensities


	[4306]
[afterword.34]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SANGS RGYAS KHAMS KYI RNAM PAR DBYE LA
MKHAS RNAMS KYIS,
,MIG SOGS RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN GANG DE
KHAMS SU GSUNGS,
,RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI MKHYEN PA
MTHA’ YAS SHING,
,RNAM KUN KHAMS KYI KHYAD PAR LA ‘JUG
STOBS SU ‘DOD,

		Those who are masters
		In the different categories
		Of an Enlightened Being

		Have described
Those things that are
The nature of the eye
		And so on as
		The propensities.

		The infinite variations
		Of the knowledge of
		Totally enlightened beings

		Engage in the details
		Of all the different
		Categories; this is

		What we assert
		Constitutes the force.


[4307]
SANGS RGYAS KHAMS MTHA’ DAG GI RNAM PAR DBYE BA LA MKHAS PA RNAMS KYIS, MIG DANG SOGS KYIS BSDUS PA RNA BA NAS YID KYI BAR DRUG DANG,

And so let’s consider all of the different categories of an Enlightened Being.  Those who are masters of this topic have a knowledge, first, of the six of the eye and “so on”—which includes everything from the ear to the thought.


[4308]
GZUGS NAS CHOS KYI BAR DRUG DANG, MIG GI RNAM SHES NAS YID KYI RNAM SHES KYI BAR DRUG DANG, DE DAG RNAMS KYI RANG BZHIN NANG STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA GANG YIN PA

So too they know all six from physical form up to objects; and the six from the awareness of the eye up to the awareness of the thought.  And then they know the “nature” of all these things—a reference to qualities such as being completely empty on the inside, and so forth.


[4309]
DE KHAMS SU GSUNGS PA’I KHAMS KYI RAB DBYE RNAM PA KUN GYI KHYAD PAR RNAMS LA, RDZOGS PA’I SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI MKHYEN PA MTHA’ YAS PA ‘JUG PA NI, KHAMS SNA TSOGS PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU ‘DOD DO,,

The infinite variations of the knowledge of totally enlightened beings engage in the details of all the different divisions of the categories which were here described as “propensities.”  And this then is what we assert constitutes the force of knowing the variety of propensities.



5) The force of knowing
     higher or lesser capacities


	[4310]
[afterword.35]
Sanskrit unavailable

,KUN TU RTOG SOGS CHES RNO NYID NI
MCHOG BZHED LA,
,’BRING GNAS SKABS DANG RTUL NYID MCHOG MIN
PAR BSHAD DANG,
,MIG LA SOGS DANG PHAN TSUN SGRUB NUS
CHUD PA LA,
,RNAM PA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA CHAGS MED
STOBS SU GSUNGS,

		There is that
State of imagination
Which is not correct,

And so on—
What we assert
To be supreme,

In a particularly
Sharp form.
	
		And then there are
		What we refer to
		As “not supreme”:

		Only middling,
		Or quite dull.

		There are the
		Eye and the rest,
		And the way these
		Inform, or have

		The power to
		Complete, each other.

		Omniscience has
		No density
		Towards them;

		This was spoken
		To be the force.		


[4311]
YANG DAG MIN PA LHAG PAR SGRO ‘DOGS PA’I KUN TU RTOG PA NI, CHAGS SOGS SKYED PA LA DBANG BYED PAS NA DBANG PO’O,,

Next let’s consider that state of imagination which is not correct, and which has a tendency to overstate things grossly.  This is known as a “force” in that it tends to force the arisal of attachment and such.


[4312]
SOGS KYIS BSDUS PA DAD PA’I DBANG PO SOGS CHES RNO BA NYID NI MCHOG TU BZHED LA, DBANG PO ‘BRING GI [f. 279b] GNAS SKABS DANG, DBANG PO RTUL BA NYID CHUNG NGU’I GNAS SKABS NI MCHOG MIN PAR BSHAD PA DANG,

The phrase “and so on” here is meant to encompass what we assert to be supreme: the powers of faith and the like, in a particularly sharp form.  And then what we refer to as “not supreme” would be the point at which our powers are only middling, or where those powers are lesser—quite dull.


[4313]
MIG LA SOGS PA’I DBANG PO NYER GNYIS DANG, DBANG PO RNAMS KYI PHAN TSUN ‘BRAS BU CHUB PA STE SGRUB NUS PA’I RANG GI NGO BO RE RE LA RNAM PA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA’I CHAGS PA STE THOGS PA MED PA DE NI, DBANG PO MCHOG DANG MCHOG MA YIN PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU GSUNGS SO,,

And then consider the 22 powers of the eye and the rest; and then the way that these powers “inform” each other, or have the power to complete each other.  Omniscience in the form of knowing the very essence of each of these has no “density” towards them here—meaning, it penetrates with the least obstruction.  This then is what was spoken to be the force of knowing both those capacities which are supreme, and those which are not.



The five beginning with
knowing the paths

[4314]
GNYIS PA NI,

This brings us to our second point from above: an explanation of the five forces beginning with that of understanding the paths that lead to every different kind of goal.



6) The force of understanding the paths
     that lead to different goals


	[4315]
[afterword.36]
Sanskrit unavailable

,LAM ‘GA’ RGYAL BA NYID DANG ‘GA’ ZHIG
RANG RGYAL GYI,
,BYANG CHUB DANG NI NYAN THOS BYANG CHUB
YI DAGS DANG,
,DUD ‘GRO LHA MI RNAMS DANG DMYAL BA
SOGS ‘GRO BA,
,DE LA MKHYEN PA CHAGS MED MTHA’ YAS
STOBS SU ‘DOD,

		Some paths lead
		To the state of a
		Victor themselves;

		Some to the
		Enlightenment of
		A self-made Buddha.

		Others lead to
		The enlightenment
		Of the listener;

		Or to a life as
		A craving spirit,
		Or an animal,

		A worldly god,
		A human,
		Or a hellbeing,

		And so on.
		What we say
		Is the force

		Is a knowledge
		Of all these
		
Which is
Without density, 
		As well as infinite.


[4316]
LAM ‘GA’ ZHIG RGYAL BA NYID DU ‘GRO BA DANG, LAM ‘GA’ ZHIG RANG RGYAL GYI BYANG CHUB DANG, ‘GA’ ZHIG NYAN THOS KYI BYANG CHUB TU ‘GRO BA DANG, YI DVAGS DANG DUD ‘GRO DANG LHA DANG MI DANG DMYAL BA RNAMS SU ‘GRO BA DANG,

Now some paths lead to the state of a Victor themselves; while some paths lead to the enlightenment of a self-made buddha.  Others lead to the enlightenment of the listener.  Still others lead to a life as a craving spirit; or an animal; a worldly god, a human, or a hellbeing.


[4317]
SOGS KYIS NI YANG DAG PA DANG LOG PAR NGES PA’I LAM LA SOGS PA RNAM PA SNA TSOGS PA STON TA {%TE}, DE RNAMS LA MKHYEN PA CHAGS THOGS MED PA NI MTHA’ YAS PA STE THAMS CAD DU ‘GRO BA’I LAM MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU ‘DOD DO,,

The phrase “and so on” here refers to a whole variety of different paths, such as those which are quite certainly pure, or mistaken—and so forth.  And so what we say is the force of knowing the paths that go to all places is a knowledge of all these which is without density, or obstruction, and is as well infinite.



7) The force of understanding
     concentration & the like

	[4318]
[afterword.37]
Sanskrit unavailable

,’JIG RTEN MTHA’ YAS RNAL ‘BYOR BYE BRAG
LA THA DAD,
,BSAM GTAN RNAM THAR BRGYAD GANG ZHI GNAS
GANG DAG DANG,
,SNYOMS ‘JUG KHYAD PAR GANG DAG GCIG PAR
BRGYAD GYUR PA,
,DE LA MKHYEN PA THOGS MED ‘DI NI
STOBS SU BSHAD,

Then there are
The details among
The activities of

Deep practitioners
On infinite
Numbers of worlds:

Concentration;
The eight total freedoms;
Those states of quietude
Which are truly pure;

And deep meditation,
Whether single or eight.

What we describe
As the force is that
Unstoppable form
Of knowing all these.


[4319]
‘JIG RTEN MTHA’ YAS PA NA YOD PA’I RNAL ‘BYOR PA’I BYE BRAG LA STE KHYAD PAR GYIS RAB TU DBYE BA THA DAD PA MTHA’ YAS PA BSAM GTAN BZHI DANG, RNAM PAR THAR PA BRGYAD DANG, GANG ZHI GNAS GANG DAG STE TING NGE ‘DZIN DANG, SNYOMS ‘JUG GI KHYAD PAR GANG DAG GCIG DANG BRGYAD DU GYUR PA STE MTHAR GYIS GNAS PA’I SNYOMS PAR ‘JUG PA DGU DANG, KUN BYANG 

And then there are the “details,” or the different divisions due to distinctions, among the activities of deep practitioners on infinite numbers of worlds.  The variations here are themselves infinite, including for example:

	 the four levels of concentration;
	 the eight total freedoms;
	 those states of quietude which are truly pure, focused meditation;
	 the nine states of deep meditation which has reached its final expression,
		whether that be in a single state or eight; and then
	 total enlightenment itself.


[4320]
DE DAG LA MKHYEN PA THOGS PA MED PA ‘DI NI, KUN NAS NYON MONGS PA DANG RNAM PAR BYANG BA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU BSHAD DO,,

And then what we describe as the “force of knowing both that which is entirely involved with the negative emotions, and that which is entirely involved with total enlightenment” is that unstoppable form of knowing all these.



8) The force of understanding
    days gone by


	[4321]
[afterword.38]
Sanskrit unavailable

,JI SRID GTI MUG DE SRID SRID GNAS
‘DAS BDAG DANG,
,SEMS CAN GZHAN RE RE YI SRID PA
SEMS CAN NI,
,JI SNYED DE SNYED MTHA’ YAS GZHIR BCAS
YUL PHYOGS DANG,
,BCAS RNAMS LA BLO GANG DANG GANG YIN
STOBS SU BSHAD,

		We have lived then
		In a cycle for the
		Total amount of time
		That we have possessed
		Dark ignorance.

		There are all the
		Beings that we and
		Other living creatures
		Have each lived though,

		In the past: this total
		Amount—infinite;
		And the foundation
		For them.  And so

		Here is a state
		Of mind which
		Unstoppable
		
		Towards all these,
		As well as the
		Specific place
		Where they took place.

		A type of perception
		Like this is what
		We refer to
		As the force.


[4322]
JI SRID GTI MUG DE SRID PA STE GCIG NAS GCIG TU BRGYUD PA THOG MA [f. 280a] MED PA’I SRID PAR GNAS PA NA,

We have lived then in a cycle of being that has no beginning: we have revolved from one existence to another, for the total amount of time that we have possessed dark ignorance.


[4323]
‘DAS PA’I DUS SU BDAG DANG SEMS CAN GZHAN RE RE YI SRID PA’I SEMS CAN NI, JI SNYED PA DE SNYED KYI SEMS CAN MTHA’ YAS PA,

And so think then of all the beings that we and other living creatures have each lived through, during all the time of the past: this total amount of living things—infinite.


[4324]
GZHI STE RGYU DANG BCAS PAR DRAN PA DANG, RANG DANG GZHAN RNAMS KHA DOG ‘DI ‘DRA BAR GYUR ZHES DRAN PA NI RNAM PA DANG BCAS PAR DRAN PA DANG, ‘DI ‘DRA ZHI GNAS ‘DI ‘DRA ZHIG TU SKYES SO ZHES DRAN PA NI,

And remember as well their “foundation”—which is to say, the causes that created them.  Remember too the details here: at that time, the color of my body and the bodies of those around me, was like this.  And remember as well, “This was the kind of meditative quietude that this kind of being had achieved.”


[4325]
YUL PHYOGS DANG BCAS PAR DRAN PA STE DRAN PA’I YUL DE RNAMS LA BLO THOGS PA MED PA GANG DANG GANG YIN PA DE NI, SNGON GYI GNAS RJES SU DRAN PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU BSHAD DO,,

And so here is a state of mind which is unstoppable—recalling all these things as well as the specific place where they took place.  Any type of perception like this is what we refer to as the force of understanding days gone by.



9) The force of the knowledge
     of the deaths and such of beings

	[4326]
[afterword.39]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SEMS CAN RNAMS KYI SEMS CAN RE RE’I
‘CHI ‘PHO DANG,
,SKYE GANG ‘JIG RTEN LA GNAS NAM MKHA’
MTHAR THUG DANG,
,BKRA MANG DE LA MKHYEN PA DUS DER
‘JUG PA YIS,
,MA CHAGS RNAM KUN YONGS DAG MTHA’ YAS
STOBS SU ‘DOD,

		And then there is
		The death, and
		Moving on, that
		
		All beings
		Have experienced

		In the form of each
		Separate living thing;
		As well as the rebirth.

		Many are brought
		To light, located
		In worlds laid
		Across infinite
		Space itself.

		When we know
		Them in that time,
		We have no attachment,

		For they are all
		Entirely pure—
		An infinity.

		This is what
		We refer to
		As the force.


[4327]
SEMS CAN RNAMS KYI SEMS CAN RE RE’I ‘CHI ‘PHO BA DANG, PHUNG PO NYING MTSAMS SBYOR BA’I SKYE BA GANG

And then there is the death, and moving on, that all living beings have experienced in the form of each separate living thing; as well as the rebirth that then they took as they crossed into a new set of the parts to a person.


[4328]
NAM MKHA’I MTHAR THUG PA’I ‘JIG RTEN LA GNAS PA SNA TSOGS PA’I LAS KYI BZO BOS BKRA BAR BYAS PA MANG PO DE LA DUS DER MKHYEN PA RNAM PA KUN YONGS SU DAG PAS MA CHAGS PA STE MA THOGS PAR ‘JUG PA YIS, YUL MTHA’ YAS PA MKHYEN PA

And then there are many images that have been brought to light by the craftsmen of all the different sorts of karma, located in worlds laid across infinite space itself.  When we know them in that time, in states of mind that have no attachment (which here means “unstoppable”)—for they are all entirely pure—we know a veritable infinity of objects.


[4329]
‘CHI ‘PHO BA DANG SKYE BA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU ‘DOD DO,,

And this then is what we refer to as the force of the knowledge of the deaths, and passing on, and rebirth of beings.



10) The force of knowing that
       the last of impurities is finished

	[4330]
[afterword.40]
Sanskrit unavailable

,RNAM KUN MKHYEN PA’I STOBS KYIS MYUR DU
RGYAL RNAMS KYI,
,NYON MONGS DAG NI BAG CHAGS DANG BCAS
‘JIG ‘GYUR DANG,
,SLOB MA LA SOGS NYON MONGS BLO YIS
‘GOG PA GANG,
,DE LA MKHYEN [218a] PA CHAGS MED MTHA’ YAS
STOBS SU ‘DOD,

		The Victors,
		Who know all
		Things there are,

		Use these forces—
		With speed—
		To destroy the
		Negative emotions,

		Along with the
		Deep seeds.

		Those who are students,
		And the rest, put a stop
		To the negative emotions
		Using their intelligence [f. 218a];

		This then constitutes
		A state of knowledge
		Which is free of density,

		And this is what
		We refer to as the
		Force of the infinite.


[4331]
RNAM PA KUN MKHYEN PA’I RGYAL BA RNAMS KYI STOBS KYIS CHAGS SOGS NYON MONGS PA DAG NI, BAG CHAGS DANG BCAS PA THAMS CAD ‘JIG PA STE BCOM PAR ‘GYUR BA DANG,

The Victors, who know all things there are, use these forces to “destroy,” or conquer—“every one of them”—referring to everything involved with the negative emotions, attachment and the rest, along with the deep seeds for these.


[4332]
SLOB MA NYAN THOS DANG LA SOGS PAS BSDUS PA RANG RKYAL {%RGYAL} BA RNAMS KYIS NYON MONGS PA RNAMS BLO STE ZAG MED KYI SHES RAB KYIS ‘GOG PA STE SPANGS PA

Those who are students, or listeners, and “the rest”—which is a reference to the self-made buddhas—put a stop to, or eliminate, everything involved with the negative emotions by using their intelligence; here referring to wisdom.


[4333]
GANG YIN PA DE LA MKHYEN PA CHAGS PA STE THOGS [f. 280b] PA MED PA NI, MTHA’ YAS PA ZAG PA ZAD PA MKHYEN PA’I STOBS SU ‘DOD DO,,

This then constitutes a state of knowledge which is free of density—free of all obstruction.  And that is what we refer to as the force of the knowledge of the infinite: the ending of all impurity.


[4334]
MYUR DU ZHES PA NI BAG CHAGS LHAG MA SHIN TU PHRA BA SANGS RGYAS KYI YE SHES SKAD CIG MA GCIG GIS SPANGS PAR STON PA’O,,

Now the lines of the root text here mention “with speed.”  This is meant to indicate that the high knowledge of an Enlightened Being eliminates all the remaining deep seeds—the very most subtle ones—in but a single instant of time.


[4335]
‘DIR NYON MONGS PA’I BAG CHAGS NI, ‘GREL PA LAS, GANG GIS SEMS KYI RGYUD ‘BAGS PAR BYED CING BSGO BAR BYED LA, RJES SU BGROD PAR BYED PA DE NI BAG CHAGS TE, NYON MONGS PA’I MUR THUG PA DANG, GOMS PA DANG, RTZA BA DANG, BAG CHAGS ZHES BYA BA NI RNAM GRANGS DAG GO, ZHES GSUNGS SHING,

What does it mean when we refer here to “deep seeds for everything involved with the negative emotions”?  The autocommentary puts it this way:

What we refer to as a “deep seed” here is that thing which functions to infect the mind; to stain the mind; to trigger influences that take us on.  For everything involved with the negative emotions, we can say that the terms “final destination”; and “habit”; and “root”; and “deep seed” are all synonymous.


[4336]
NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM PAS NYON MONGS SPANGS KYANG BAG CHAGS DE SPONG MI NUS PAR GSUNGS LA,

It is also stated that—even though enemy destroyers who belong to the listeners and the self-made buddhas have eliminated negative emotions—they are unable to eliminate this deep seed.


[4337]
YANG DE NYID LAS, DE LA MA RIG PA’I BAG CHAGS NI SHES BYA YONGS SU GCOD PA’I GEGS SU GYUR PA YIN LA, ZHES SHES SGRIB TU YANG GSUNGS SO,,

The same text also says,

The deep seed for misunderstanding acts as an impediment for the final analysis of knowable things.


[4338]
LUGS ‘DI LA CHOS KYI BDAG ‘DZIN NI NYON MONGS SU BZHED PAS, SHES SGRIB KYI GTZO BO NI GNYIS SNANG ‘KHRUL BA’I BAG CHAGS LA BYA DGOS TE,

Now according to the present system, the tendency to hold that things are themselves is considered a negative emotion.  As such, we would have to say that the most serious of the obstacles to omniscience is the deep seed for the mistake of a perceptual inconsistency.


[4339]
‘DI NI ‘PHAGS PA YAB SRAS KYIS GZHAN DU SHES SGRIB KYI NGOS ‘DZIN GSAL BAR MA GSUNGS PAS, ‘DIR GSUNGS PA NYID LA BRTAN {%BRTEN} PAR BYA’O,,

On this point, the fact is that the father & son, for the Realized One, have not clearly described any identification of what an obstacle to omniscience would be like.  As such, I would advise you to rely for that upon the very statement you find here.


[4340]
YANG ‘GREL PA LAS, MA RIG PA DANG, ‘DOD CHAGS LA SOGS PA’I BAG CHAGS DE YANG RNAM PA THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA DANG, SANGS RGYAS KHO NA LA LDOG PAR ‘GYUR GYI, GZHAN DAG LA NI MA YIN NO, ZHES GSUNGS PAS 

The autocommentary further reads,

Something else, about the deep seeds for desire and the like.  They are stopped only for those who know the way of all things, and Buddhas—but not for others.


[4341]
NYAN RANG DGRA BCOM PA DANG, SA BRGYAD PA NAS NYON MONGS KYI SA BON ZAD PAR GSUNGS PA’I NYON MONGS KYI SA BON NI, ‘DIR BSHAD PA’I NYON MONGS KYI BAG CHAGS DANG MI [f. 281a] GCIG GO

As such, when it is stated that with listeners and self-made buddhas who are enemy destroyers, and from the eighth bodhisattva level on, the seeds of negative emotions are finished off, the seeds being referred to are not the same as the deep seeds for negative emotions that we are talking about here in this context.


[4342]
,BAG CHAGS ‘DI SHIN TU PHRA BA NI SA BCU RGYUN GYI THA MA’I BAR CHAD MED LAM SKYE BA LA PHYOGS PA DANG, SHIN TU PHRA BA ‘GAG PA LA PHYOGS PA GNYIS DUS MNYAM LA, DE THOG MAR SPANGS PA’I RNAM GROL LAM NI SANGS RGYAS KYI YE SHES SKAD CIG MA DANG PO YIN NO,,

As for the extremely subtle form of the deep seeds here, that point at which the uninterrupted path of the final period in the flow of the tenth level is approaching its arisal, and the point at which the stopping of these extremely subtle forms is just approaching, occur simultaneously.  And the path of liberation in which we have first eliminated these represents the first moment of the high knowledge of an Enlightened Being.


[4343]
DE’I PHYIR RNAM PA KUN MKHYEN PA’I STOBS KYIS ‘JIG PAR GSUNGS SO,,

This is why we see the statement that these are destroyed by the force of knowing all the things there are.


[4344]
DE LTAR STOBS RNAMS KYIS SHES BYA MTHA’ DAG MKHYEN PAR GSUNGS PA NI MNGON GYUR DU YIN LA, SANGS RGYAS KYI MNGON SUM LA SHUGS RTOGS MI RUNG BAS SNANG NAS MKHYEN DGOS SO,,

Thus it is that we see it spoken that the various forces allow us to know all existing entitites; and this reference is to a direct form of perception.  It wouldn’t make sense to say that the direct perception of a Buddha involved perceiving things in some incidental manner; as such, they must know things as those things make their appearance.


[4345]
DE YANG RNAM PA MA SHAR BAR MKHYEN PA ‘DI’I LUGS MIN PA NI RIGS PA DRUG CU PA’I ‘GREL PA LAS GSAL BAR BSHAD DO,,

Moreover, the idea that they could know objects without those things making their appearance is not something that this particular system would assert; this point is clearly made in the commentary to The Sixty Verses.


[4346]
DE’I PHYIR DA LTAR BA MNGON SUM DU ‘JAL BA’I SHUGS LA ‘DAS MA ‘ONGS GNYIS ‘JAL BA YANG MIN NO,,

As such as well we can say that the idea that an Enlightened Being perceives the past and the future incidental to perceiving the present directly is incorrect.


[4347]
‘DI YANG NYI MA DE RING LTA BU’I DUS DA LTA BA ‘DI’I DUS SU, DE LA LTOS PA’I ‘DAS MA ‘ONGS GNYIS MED PAS DUS DER DE GNYIS MA GZHAL YANG, DE RING GI DUS MKHYEN PA’I YE SHES DE NYID KYIS ‘DAS MA ‘ONGS THAMS CAD MKHYEN PA MI ‘GAL TE,

On this point, we could consider the present moment in, for example, today.  The two of the past and the future do not, relative to this point in time, exist.  As such, it is not the case that these two can be apprehended at that moment in time.  That does not make it a contradiction, however, to say that the very same high knowledge which perceives today could perceive everything both past and future, as well.


[4348]
DPER NA SA BON GYI DUS KYI MYU GU SA BON GYIS MI SKYED KYANG, SA BON GYIS MYU GU SKYED PA MI ‘GAL BA BZHIN NO,,

We cannot, for example, say that a sprout is grown by a seed during the time of the seed; but that doesn’t mean that there is any contradiction in saying that the seed produces the sprout.



The impossibility of describing
all the fine qualities

[4349]
GSUM PA NI,

This brings us to our third section from before: a discussion of how it would be impossible
ever to describe all these fine qualities.


[4350]
SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN MTHA’ DAG PA NI, SANGS RGYAS NYID KYIS BSKAL PA GRANGS MED PAR SKU TSE BYIN GYIS BRLABS SHING, ‘PHRIN LAS GZHAN MI ‘DA’ BAR SKYEN PA SKYEN PAR GSUNGS KYANG, YON TAN RDZOGS PAR MI ‘GYUR NA, BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYIS CI ZHIG SMOS,

The entirety of the fine qualities of an Enlightened Being constitutes a topic that the Buddhas themselves could attempt to describe at the greatest speed possible, but which—even in the lifetime of a holy form blessed to live for eons beyond any count, and even if this form had no need to pass any time in other holy deeds—they would never come to speaking of the last of the qualities.  If this is the case, then there is no need for us to speak of how a bodhisattva could ever list all of them.


[4351]
DES [f. 281b] NA RANG SANGS RGYAS DANG NYAN THOS RNAMS KYIS YON TAN MTHAR PHYIN PAR SHES PA’AM BRJOD PAR NUS PA LTA SMOS KYANG CI ZHIG DGOS, DON ‘DI NYID DPE’I SGO NAS BSHAD PA,

As such, there is no need for us even to mention how the self-made buddhas and listeners could ever comprehend, or express, these fine qualities in their entirety.  The next lines of the root text then describe this same point, in terms of a metaphor.


	[4352]
[afterword.41]
Sanskrit unavailable

,NAM MKHA’ MED PAS ‘DAB CHAGS LDOG PAR
MI ‘GYUR GYI,
,’DI NI RANG MTHU ZAD PAS LDOG PAR
‘GYUR DE BZHIN,
,SLOB MA DANG BCAS SANGS RGYAS SRAS RNAMS
SANGS RGYAS KYI,
,YON TAN MKHA’ LTAR MTHA’ YAS MA BRJOD
LDOG PAR ‘GYUR,

		It is not as though
		The winged ones
		Must eventually

Come to a stop
Because there is
No more sky;

Rather, this one flies
Until their strength
Is exhausted—

And then they
Must turn back.

The students
And those in
Their company,

And the buddhas
And the children
Are similar:

They can describe
The high qualities
Of the Enlightened Ones,

Similar to the sky
In being infinite,

But they will
Have to stop,

Without having
Listed them all.


[4353]
‘DI LTAR NA {%NAM} MKHA’ ‘DAB GSHOG YANGS PA’I RLUNG GI SHUGS KYIS, PHA ROL GNON PA YANG NAM MKHA’ LA ‘PHUR BA NA, NAM MKHA’ MED PA STE ZAD PAS ‘DAB CHAGS KYI DBANG PO DE LDOG PAR MI ‘GYUR GYI

Thus it is that a bird with the broadest of wingspans might push the air of the sky back through the power of the wind created by flapping those wings; and thus fly through that sky.  But it is not as though this lord of the winged ones must eventually come to a stop because there is no more sky: because the extent of the sky itself has been exhausted.


[4354]
‘DIR NI ‘DIR ‘PHUR ‘PHUR BAS NAM ZHIG NA RANG GI MTHU STOBS ZAD PAS LDOG PAR ‘GYUR BA

Rather, this great bird flies and flies until at some point their strength and power are exhausted; and then then they must turn back.


[4355]
DE BZHIN DU, SLOB MA NYAN THOS DANG DE DANG BCAS PA’I RANG SANGS RGYAS DANG, SANGS RGYAS KYI SRAS SA CHEN PO LA BZHUGS PA RNAMS KYIS KYANG SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN NAM MKHA’ LTAR MTHA’ YAS PA MA BRJOD PAR LDOG PAR ‘GYUR BA NI,

The students—referring to the listeners—and “those in their company” (referring to the self-made buddhas), and even those children of the Buddhas residing at the highest levels, are similar.  They can undertake to describe the high qualities of the Enlightened Ones—qualities that are similar to the sky itself, in being infinite; but in the end they will have to stop, without having listed them all.


[4356]
YON TAN RDZOGS PAS MA YIN GYI RANG GI BLO’I STOBS NYAMS PAS YIN NO,,

That is, it is not as if they have come to the last of these fine qualities, and stopped there; rather, they must stop their description because the power of their own mind has been exhausted in the attempt.


	[4357]
[afterword.42]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE PHYIR BDAG ‘DRAS KHYOD YON ‘DI DAG CI,
,SHES PA DANG NI BRJOD PAR NUS ‘GYUR RAM,
,’ON KYANG DE DAG ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYIS,
,BSHAD PHYIR DOGS SPANGS CUNG ZHIG
TZAM ZHIG SMRAS,

		Thus how could
		Someone like me
		Ever be able

		To understand,
		And then to express,

		These high qualities
		That you possess?

		Nonetheless,
		I have thrown aside
		Any doubts,

		And boldly offered
		Just the barest list,

		Because those
		Have been described
		By The Arya,
		Nagarjuna.


[4358]
SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN RDZOGS PAR BRJOD MI NUS PA DE’I PHYIR ‘GREL PA MDZAD PA BDAG ‘DRA BAS SANGS RGYAS KHYOD KYI YON TAN ‘DI DAG NI CI SHES PA DANG NI BRJOD PAR NUS PAR ‘GYUR RAM CI STE MI NUS SO,,

The fact is then that the fine qualities of the Buddhas could never be listed in their entirety; and thus how could it ever come to be that “someone like me”—a reference to the author of this classical commentary—could ever be able to understand, and then to express, these high qualities that “you” (referring to the Buddha) possess?  In reality I would never manage to do so.


[4359]
DE LTAR BDAG LA RANG STOBS KYIS SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN SHES TZAM ZHIG SHES PA’ANG MED PA ‘ON KYANG, BDAG GIS DOGS PA SPANGS PA STE TSAM TSOM MED PAR YON TAN CUNG ZAD TZAM ZHIG SMRAS PA NI,

Thus it is that I—acting on my own accord—can say that I don’t even possess enough knowledge to grasp even some part of the high qualities of an Enlightened One.  Nonetheless, I can say that I have thrown aside any doubts—any faltering here—and boldly offered just the barest list of those qualities here.


[4360]
YON TAN DE DAG ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYIS BSHAD PA’I PHYIR TE DE LA BRTEN NAS YIN NO,,

And I have been able to do so only because those qualities have been described by The Arya, Nagarjuna; and I have relied upon that description here.



Benefits of understanding
the qualities

[4361]
BZHI PA NI,

Which brings us to our fourth point from above: a demonstration of the benefits of understanding the two kinds of fine qualities.


	[4362]
[afterword.43]
Sanskrit unavailable

,ZAB MO STONG PA NYID YIN TE,
,YON TAN GZHAN RNAMS RGYA CHE BA’O,
,ZAB DANG RGYA CHE’I TSUL SHES PAS,
,YON TAN ‘DI DAG ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR,

		The profound here
		Is emptiness;

		The other
		Fine features
		Are the widespread.

		When we come
		To an understanding
		Of both the profound
		And the widespread,

		We will be able
		To attain these
		Fine features.


[4363]
MDOR BSDUS NA BSTAN BCOS ‘DI LAS SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA GNYIS BSTAN PA’I ZAB MO NI STONG PA NYID CHOS KYI SKU DANG, GZHI [f. 282a] DANG LAM GYI STONG PA NYID DO,,

To put it briefly then, the fine qualities of the Enlightened Ones have been described—in this classical commentary—as being of two types: the profound, and the widespread.  The “profound” here is a reference to emptiness—referring here to the emptiness of the holy body of all things, as well as to the emptiness of the original condition of things, and to the path itself.


[4364]
DE LAS GZHAN PA SA BCU GCIG GI YON TAN DANG STOBS LA SOGS PA BSHAD PA RNAMS NI RGYA CHE BA’I YON TAN NO,,

And then when we refer to the “widespread” good qualities, we are speaking of the other ones: the fine features of the eleven levels, and the forces and so on.


[4365]
DE ‘DRA BA’I ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I YON TAN GYI TSUL LEGS PAR SHES PAS NI, DON DE GNYIS SHES NAS BSGOMS PAS SANGS RGYAS KYI YON TAN GNYIS PO ‘DI DAG ‘THOB PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

And suppose that we come to a good understanding of both these profound qualities, and the widespread ones.  If we learn and then practice these things deeply, then we will ourselves be able to attain these two good types of fine features.



The holy body of emanation

[4366]
GSUM PA NI,

And with this we come to our third section from above: a presentation concerning our emanation body.


[4367]
DA NI SPRUL PA’I SKU NYAN RANG DANG BYANG SEMS RNAMS KYI DON DANG THABS THUN MONG BA ‘BYUNG ZHING, SO SKYE RNAMS KYI DON YANG CI RIGS PAR ‘BYUNG BA, BDE ‘GRO LA SOGS PA’I SGRUB BYED DU GYUR PA’I DBANG DU BYAS NAS BSHAD PA,

That is, the next section here is meant to address the holy emanation body, from which are derived the goals of both the listeners & self-made buddhas, and the bodhisattvas—providing spiritual methods for both together.  From here are derived the goals of the common beings as well; with this form aiding us in our quest for a higher rebirth, and the like.


	[4368]
[afterword.44]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SLAR YANG MI G-YO SKU MNGA’ KHYOD KYIS
SRID GSUM BYON NAS SPRUL RNAMS KYIS,
,GSHEGS PA DANG NI BLTAM DANG BYANG CHUB
ZHI BA’I ‘KHOR LO’ANG STON PAR MDZAD,
,DE LTAR KHYOD KYIS ‘JIG RTEN G-YO BAG
SPYOD CAN RE BA’I ZHAGS PA NI,
,MANG POS BCINGS PA MA LUS THUGS RJES
MYA NGAN ‘DAS PAR BKRI BAR MDZAD,

		You continue on
		To all three worlds,
		Because you possess
		
		A holy form which
		Never shifts out;

		You use your
		Emanations to travel.

		And then you
		Make a display
		Of taking
		Your holy birth,

		And undertake
		To teach the Wheel
		For enlightenment
		And peace.

		Thus do you act
		Towards the world,

		Bound tightly
		In the shackles

		Of their manifold
		Hopes, sporting in
		All kinds of roles.

		Out of your compassion,
You act to lead
		Each & every one
		On to their nirvana.	


[4369]
CHOS KYI SKU BRNYES SU ZIN KYANG SLAR YANG DA {%DE} KHO NA NYID LA MNYAM PAR BZHAG PA LAS MI G-YO BA’I SKU MNGA’ BA KHYOD KYIS SA ‘OG SA STENG SA BLA’I SRID PA GSUM DU BYON NAS,

Now even though you have already completed your achievement of the holy body of all things, you continue on to making your way to all three of the worlds: to the area below the earth; upon the earth; and above the earth.  And you do so because you possess a holy form which never shifts at all out of a state of deep meditation upon suchness.


[4370]
SPRUL PA’I SKU RNAMS KYIS DGA’ LDAN NAS MI YUL DU GSHEGS PA DANG NI,

That is, you use your emanation bodies to depart from the Heaven of Happiness and travel to the lands of humans.


[4371]
BLTAMS PA LA SOGS PAS YAB YUM DANG SRAS DANG ‘GREL {%’BREL} BAR STON ZHING, BYANG CHUB PA ZHI BA MYANG ‘DAS KYI GRONG KHYER DU ‘JUG PA’I CHOS KYI ‘KHOR LO’ANG DBANG PO DANG ‘TSAM PAR STON PAR MDZAD DO,,

And then you make a display of taking your holy birth and the like: you show yourself as though you are the child in a relationship with your high father and mother.  And next you undertake to teach the Wheel of the Dharma, in a way which fits the capacities of differing individuals, helping them to enter the great city of enlightenment: peace, going beyond all grief.


[4372]
DE LTAR KHYOD KYIS ‘JIG RTEN TE SEMS CAN GYI KHAMS SPYOD PA SNA TSOGS PA CAN RE BA STE SRED PA’I ZHAGS PA NI MANG POS BCINGS PA

Thus do you act towards the world, towards those living beings of such varying natures and activities, bound tightly in the shackles of their manifold “hopes”—here referring to their desires.


[4373]
MA LUS PA GRAGS PA DANG PHAN LAN BZHED PA SOGS LA MI LTOS PA’I THUGS RJE CHEN POS MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PAR BKRI BA STE ‘GOD PAR MDZAD DO,,

And you help each & every one of them, out of your great compassion—without any hopes for some kind of fame, or idea that someone may provide you with something in return.  That is, you act to lead them on to their nirvana: you take them and place them into this state.


[4374]
G-YO BAG SPYOD CAN ZHES PA LA ‘GREL BSHAD KYI ‘GYUR LA, SNA TSOGS SPYOD CAN ZHES ‘BYUNG BA ‘GREL PA DANG MTHUN NO,,

The unusual phrase here—“sporting in all kinds of roles”—is given in the translation of the classical Explanation as “living all kinds of activities”; which fits the intent of the autocommentary.



All a single path

[4375]
BZHI PA NI,

With this we come to our fourth part from above: a proof that in the end it is all a single path.


[4376]
[f. 282b] DE LTAR SKU GSUM GYI RNAM GZHAG BSHAD NAS, THEG PA GCIG LA THEG PA GSUM DU BSTAN PA DGONGS PA CAN DU BSHAD PA,

Now that we have completed our explanation of how the holy bodies are presented as three, we come to a verse which is meant to explain why the presentation of the single path as being three paths was not meant literally.


	[4377]
[afterword.45]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GANG PHYIR ‘DI NA DE NYID SHES LAS
DRI MA MTHA’ DAG SEL BA NI,
,LHUR BYED GZHAN MED CHOS RNAMS DE NYID
RNAM ‘GYUR DBYE LA’ANG BSTEN MIN ZHING,
,DE NYID YUL CAN BLO GROS ‘DI YANG
THA DAD ‘GYUR BA MA YIN LA,
,DE YI PHYIR NA KHYOD KYIS ‘GRO LA
THEG PA MI MNYAM DBYER MED BSTAN,

Why have we taken
Our approach?

Even though there is
Nothing there
Which is our focus,

We have been presenting
Clearing away
Each & every impurity,

A topic different
From discussing suchness.

It is not the case
That we are suggesting
Further that one

Rely upon differing
Versions of the
Suchness of things—
Upon divisions.

Nor is it the case
That the insight
Which takes suchness
As its object
Possesses separate ones.

Thus it is that you
Have taught to beings
One which is indivisible,
With no equal
Among ways.


[4378]
RGYU MTSAN GANG GI PHYIR NA ‘DI NA CHOS RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID SHES PA LAS GZHAN SGRIB GNYIS KYI DRI MA MTHA’ DAG SEL BA NI, LHUR BYED PA STE GTZO BOR GYUR PA MED LA,

Let us say something about the reason why we have taken our particular approach here.  Even though there is nothing there which is our focus (which is to say, the main thing), we have been presenting in this part of the text the topic of clearing away each & every impurity—the two obstacles; which is a topic different from discussing the suchness of all objects.


[4379]
CHOS RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID KYANG MI ‘DRA BA’I RNAM ‘GYUR GYI DBYE BA STEN PA’ANG MIN ZHING STE MIN PAS,

It is not the case that we are suggesting further that practitioners need to “rely upon” differing versions of the suchness of things; which is to say, we are not focusing here upon the divisions of this reality.


[4380]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI YUL CAN GYI BLO GROS TE YE SHES ‘DI YANG YUL ‘JAL BA’I RNAM PA THA DAD PA MI ‘DRA BAR ‘GYUR BA YANG MA YIN PA

Nor is it the case that the insight or high knowledge here, which takes suchness as its object, possesses separate—disparate—aspects as it takes its objects under consideration.


[4381]
DE YI PHYIR NA, THUB PA KHYOD KYIS GDUL BYA’I ‘GRO BA LA THEG PA GZHAN GANG DANG YANG MI MNYAM PA DBYER MED PA’I THEG PA GCIG BSTAN TE,

Thus it is that you, Able One, have taught to your disciples—to beings—a single way which is indivisible, and which finds no equal at all among any other ways.


[4382]
JI SKAD DU, ‘OD SRUNGS CHOS THAMS CAD MNYAM PA NYID DU RTOGS NA MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ BA YIN LA, DE YANG GCIG YIN GYI GNYIS DANG GSUM NI MA YIN NO, ZHES ‘BYUNG BA’I PHYIR RO,,

We see this fact reflected in the scripture which reads,

O protector of light, if a person has a realization of the equality of all existing entities, then they will pass beyond all grief.  And this is but a single thing; it is not two, it is not three.


[4383]
‘PHAGS PAS KYANG,
,CHOS KYI DBYINGS LA DBYER MED PHYIR,
,KHYOD LA THEG PA’I DBYE BA MED,
,THEG PA GSUM DU BSTAN PA NI,
,SEMS CAN RNAMS NI GZHUG PHYIR RO,
ZHES ‘JUG PA DANG MTHUN PAR GSUNGS SO,,

The Arya has as well made the following statement, which accords with The Entrance:

	The realm of all things
	Possesses no different divisions;

	Thus it is that according to you
	The way has no divisions.

	Teaching the different ways
	As being three was only
	To allow beings their entrance.


[4384]
DE DAG GIS NI DE KHO NA NYID MA RTOGS PAR NYON MONGS THAMS CAD ZAD PAR MI NUS PA LA, CHOS RNAMS KYI DE KHO NA NYID LA MI MTHUN PA CHEN PO MED PA’I PHYIR NA,

What these references are saying is that—if one is unable to realize suchness—then they will never be able to finish off all the negative emotions; and that there are no major discrepancies between the types of suchness that existing objects possess.


[4385]
MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PAR BGROD DANG LA {%BGROD PA LA}, DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS MA RTOGS KYI RGYU’I THEG PA MI ‘DRA BA BSHAD PA DANG, NYON MONGS ZAD PA’I MYANG ‘DAS TZAM THOB NAS, THEG PA GZHAN DU MI ‘GRO BA’I ‘BRAS [f. 283a] BU’AM THEG PA ‘GA’ ZHIG BSHAD PA NI,

This leads then to the following conclusion.  We do see varying explanations of the way that acts as a cause—where we may or may not have realized suchness, in our journey to nirvana.  We see as well explanations of a number of result states where we do not travel on to some other way; that is, explanations of different ways, after we have achieved no more than nirvana in the form of eliminating the negative emotions.


[4386]
GDUL BYA RE ZHIG DRANG BA’I PHYIR GSUNGS PAR BSTAN PA ‘DI, LEGS PAR RTOGS NA THEG DMAN LA CHOS KYI BDAG MED RTOGS PA MED PAR BSHAD PA RNAMS KYI DGONGS PA RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR RO,,

If we truly grasp teachings like this—teachings which were enunciated only in order to lead on certain of the disciples—then we will come to grasp the true intent of explanations in the lower way that there is no realization of the lack of a self-nature to things in general.


[4387]
GAL TE GANG THOB NAS LAM GZHAN DU ‘GRO MI DGOS PA’I MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA GCIG KHO NA YIN LA, NYAN RANG GI THEG PAS KYANG MYA NGAN LAS ‘DA’ BAR BSTAN PA JI LTAR YIN ZHE NA,

Which may lead one to ask the following question:

If there really is only one nirvana which—when you achieve it—you no longer need to travel upon any other path, then why is it that in the ways of the listener and self-made buddhas they present a nirvana as well?


[4388]
DE LTAR BSTAN PA ‘DI DGONGS PA CAN DU BSHAD PA,

The following lines then are presented in order to explain that this particular presentation is not to be taken literally.


	[4389]
[afterword.46]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GANG PHYIR ‘GRO LA NYES PA SKYED BYED
SNYIGS MA ‘DI DAG YOD GYUR PA,
,DE PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN SANGS RGYAS SPYOD YUL
GTING ZAB LA ‘JUG MI ‘GYUR ZHING,
,BDE GSHEGS GANG PHYIR KHYOD LA MKHYEN RAB
THUGS RJE THABS DANG LHAN CIG PA,
,MNGA’ DANG GANG PHYIR BDAG GIS SEMS CAN
DGROL ZHES KHYOD KYIS ZHAL BZHES TE,

		Now there is
		A certain reason:

		Something which
Functions to trigger
Problems within
Living beings.

And that is
The presence of
Those degenerations.

As such, the realms
In which Buddhas act
Are too deep
For the world;

They cannot engage
In something
With such depths.

Because the fact is
That you, Those Who
Have Gone to Bliss,

Possess in conjunction
Knowledge and
A method consisting
Of compassion.

And further you
Made a certain
Commitment:

“I will liberate
Living beings.”


[4390]
GANG GI PHYIR ‘GRO BA RNAMS LA NYES PA STE NYON MONGS SHAS CHEN PO SKYED PAR BYED PA’I RGYUR GYUR PA LUS SEMS LAS SU MI RUNG BAR BYED PA’I SEMS CAN DANG SKAL BA DANG NYON MONGS PA DANG LTA BA DANG TSE’I SNYIGS MA LNGA PO ‘DI DAG NI YOD PAR ‘GYUR PA,

Now there is a certain reason for things here, that there is a specific cause in action which functions to trigger “problems”—meaning, an abundance of negative emotions—within living beings.  And that is the presence of those famous five degenerations: those of living beings; of their spiritual fortune; their negative emotions; their viewpoints; and their lifetimes.


[4391]
DE DAG GIS LHAG PAR MOS PA KHYAD PAR DU ‘PHAGS PA ‘JOMS PAR BYED PAS, SANGS RGYAS KYI YE SHES LA DON GNYER BYED PA ‘GOG PAR BYED PA

These factors function strongly to smash the especially high aspirations that people might entertain; as such, they act to block their aspiration for achieving the high knowledge of the Buddhas.


[4392]
DE’I PHYIR ‘JIG RTEN TE GDUL BYA SANGS RGYAS KYI SPYOD YUL ZAB PAS GTING DPAG DKA’ BA LA ‘JUG PAR MI ‘GYUR ZHING,

As such, the realms in which the Buddhas act are too deep for “the world”—for disciples.  They cannot engage in something with depths so difficult to fathom.


[4393]
GANG GI PHYIR BDE BAR GSHEGS PA KHYOD LA GDUL BYA ‘DUL BA’I THABS LA MKHAS PA’I MKHYEN RAB DANG, DE DAG GI DON LA BSNYEL BA MI MNGA’ BA’I THUGS RJE’I THABS DANG LHAN CIG PA MNGA’ BA DANG,

Because the fact is that you, Those Who Have Gone to Bliss, possess in conjunction two things.  First there is your knowledge, which is wise in the methods for taming disciples.  And then you have a method consisting of compassion, which has a quality of never overlooking their needs.


[4394]
GANG GI PHYIR SNGON BYANG SEMS KYI DUS SU BDAG GIS SEMS CAN THAMS CAD DGROL BAR BYA’O ZHES KHYOD KYIS ZHAL GYIS BZHES PA DE NYID THABS KYI RNAM PA GZHAN GYIS NGES PAR BSGRUB DGOS SO,,

And further the fact is that—in times before, when you were simple bodhisattvas—you made a certain commitment: you said, “I will liberate each and every living being.”  And then just such a commitment had to be accomplished by means of yet another kind.


	[4395]
[afterword.47]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE PHYIR MKHAS PA RIN PO CHE YI
GLING DU CHAS PA’I SKYE TSOGS KYI,
,NGAL BA NYER SEL GRONG KHYER YID ‘ONG
BAR DU RNAM PAR BKOD PA LTAR,
,KHYOD KYIS THEG PA ‘DI NI SLOB MA
NYE BAR ZHI BA’I TSUL LA YID,
,SBYAR ZHING RNAM PAR [218b] DBEN LA’ANG
BLO SBYANGS RNAMS LA LOGS SU GSUNGS,

		Thus it is
		That a master

		Who is trying to
		Dispel the fatigue

		That a group of
People might display

In a voyage to
The Isle of Jewels

Sets forth visions of
A lovely magical city,
Long before.

Just so do you
Undertake a
Certain way;

All this is meant
To attract their minds

To the way
Of total peace.

		And then separately,
		After they had 
		Trained themselves

		In thoughts of
		Total isolation [f. 218b],
		You taught them.
		

[4396]
GANG GI [f. 283b] PHYIR ‘GRO BA RNAMS THEG CHEN LA ‘JUG PA LA GEGS MANG PO YOD CING, ‘GRO BA RNAMS KYANG MYANG ‘DAS LA NGES PAR DGOD DGOS PA DE’I PHYIR,

Now it is the fact that there exist many impediments that keep living beings from entering into the greater way; while at the same time these beings must quite certainly be brought to their nirvana.


[4397]
PAD DKAR LAS GSUNGS PA LTAR DED DPON MKHAS PAS RGYA MTSO NA GNAS PA’I RIN PO CHE’I GLING DU CHAS PA’I TSE SKYE BO’I TSOGS KYIS, YUN RING POR BGROD PA’I NGAL BA NYE BAR SEL BA’I PHYIR DU

Thus it is that the Sutra of the White Lotus has a pertinent description here.  It speaks of a master ship captain who is trying to dispel the fatigue that a group of people might display when they have taken to sea, in a voyage to the Isle of Jewels—and the trip has simply been too long.


[4398]
RIN PO CHE’I GLING DU MA SLEBS PA’I BAR DU GRONG KHYER YID DU ‘ONG BA RNAM PAR BKOD PA STE SPRUL PA LTAR DU,

And this skillful captain manages to “set forth visions”—that is, to emanate—in the distance a lovely magical city, long before the ship arrives at it intended destination, of that Isle of Jewels.


[4399]
BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KHYOD KYIS KYANG THEG PA CHEN PO’I TSU ROL TU THEG CHEN DE THOB PA’I THABS SU GYUR PA ‘DI NI, NYE BAR ZHI BA’I TSUL GYI BDE BA LA YID SBYAR BA’I PHYIR DU, SLOB MA NYAN THOS DANG DES MTSON PA’I RANG RGYAL LA NYAN RANG GI THEG PA GNYIS GSUNGS SHING,

And just so do you as well, O Conqueror, undertake a certain stratagem—even before people reach the greater way—as a way of getting them to attain to this greater way.  And this is that you describe to them the two ways of the listener and the self-made buddha, to students who are described as “listeners” in a way which is meant to indicate, in addition, those self-made ones.  And all this is meant to attract their minds to the happiness of the way of total peace.


[4400]
DE NAS ‘KHOR BA’I NYON MONGS KYIS RNAM PAR DBEN PA’I BLO SBYANGS PA RNAMS LA LOGS SU STE PHYI NAS THEG PA CHEN PO KHO NA GSUNGS LA,

And then “separately,” or after that—after the point where they had trained themselves in the thoughts of “total isolation” from the negative thoughts of the cycle of pain—you taught them only the greater way.


[4401]
DE RNAMS KYIS KYANG SANGS RGYAS RNAMS LTAR TSOGS RDZOGS PAR BYAS NAS, GDON MI ZA PAR SANGS RGYAS THOB PAR BYA DGOS SO,,

And all of this was indeed necessary because you knew that—beyond any doubt at all—they too needed to attain Buddhahood, completing the necessary accumulations as other Enlightened Beings had, before them.


[4402]
THEG PA GCIG TU SGRUB PA ‘DI MDO KUN LAS BTUS PA LAS, THEG PA GCIG TU ZAD PAR NI MDO SDE DU MA LAS GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES SOGS KYIS GSUNGS PA LAS SHES PAR BYA’O,,

The fact that the ways can be proven as one is something that we can understand from sources such as the Compendium of the Sutras, where it says, “We can understand this from the fact that many different sutras describe how, in the end, there is indeed but a single way.”



The point of enlightenment

[4403]
LNGA PA LA GNYIS, MNGON PAR BYANG CHUB PA’I DUS KYI DBANG DU BYAS PA’I BSHAD PA DANG, BZHUGS PA’I DUS KYI DBANG DU BYAS PA’I BSHAD PA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

Which brings us then to our fifth part here—an explanation of the point at which we have become enlightened, and remain there.  Here we proceed in two different sections: an explanation relative to the point at which one reaches total enlightenment; and then an explanation relative to the point at which one is residing in total enlightenment.  Here is the first.


	[4404]
[afterword.48]
Sanskrit unavailable

,BDE BAR GSHEGS PA MA LUS PHYOGS SHING
SANGS RGYAS YUL DAG NA,
,PHRA RAB RDUL GYI RDUL RNAMS BDOG PAR
GYUR PA JI SNYED PA,
,BYANG CHUB MCHOG RAB DAM PAR GSHEGS PA’I
SKAL BA {%BSKAL PA} DE SNYED DE,
,’ON KYANG KHYOD KYI GSANG BA ‘DI NI
BSNYAD BGYI MA LAGS SO,

		There are all the lands
		Of Enlightened Beings,
		
		Paradises in every
		Corner of the universe.

		There exist,
		In these worlds,
		
		A certain number
		Of atoms of dust.

		And the eons
That it has taken
Those Gone to Bliss

To reach that most
High, and holy, and
Supreme enlightenment

Are equal to
That very number.

Even so,
This particular
Secret of yours

Is not something
We would normally
Describe openly.


[4405]
PHYOGS BCU’I ZHING MA LUS PA SANGS RGYAS KYI YUL DU GYUR PA DAG JI SNYED PA DE NA, RDUL PHRA RAB KYI RDUL GYI GRANGS RNAMS BDOG [f. 284a] PAR GYUR PA JI SNYED PA BDE BAR GSHEGS PA KHYOD BYANG CHUB KYI MCHOG RAB DAM PAR GSHEGS PA’I BSKAL PA YANG DE SNYED DE,

Consider now all of the lands of the Enlightened Beings—the paradises that stretch through every corner of the universe.  There exist, in these worlds, a certain number of atoms of dust.  And the eons that it has taken you, Those Gone to Bliss, to “go” or reach that most holy, and high, and supreme enlightenment are as well equal to that very number.


[4406]
DE LTAR YIN PA ‘ON KYANG SNGON DGE RTZA MA BSAGS PA RNAMS MOS PAR DKA’ BA’I PHYIR, KHYOD KYI GSANG BA ‘DI NI BSNYAD PAR BGYI BA MA LAGS SO,,

And even though this is the case, the knowledge of it would make it difficult for those who had not already accumulated the requisite virtue to even hope to reach this goal.  As such, this particular secret of yours is not something we would normally describe openly.


[4407]
DE LA LHAG PAR MOS PA RNAMS LA NI BSOD NAMS GZHAL DU MED PA BSAG PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR ‘DIR BSHAD DO,,

And in fact we have spoken of it here only to assist those who already possess this special aspiration, in their quest to accumulate truly inestimable goodness.


[4408]
‘DI LA ‘GREL BSHAD BYED PAS ‘DI YANG SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD KYI CHOS KYI SKU GCIG YIN PAS DE LTAR BRJOD PA YIN GYI, GZHAN DU NA SANGS RGYAS GZHAN ‘BYUNG BAR MI ‘GYUR BAS SO, ZHES ‘CHAD PA NI

On this point, the author of The Explanation says—

The explanation is made as it is here is only because the holy body of all things belonging to each & every one of the Buddhas is but one body; otherwise, we could not say that other Buddhas had appeared.


[4409]
MI ‘THAD DE, ‘GREL PA LAS SPRUL PA’I SKU ‘BYUNG BA’I DBANG DU BYAS PAR GSUNGS PA’I PHYIR RO,,

This idea though is mistaken, since in the autocommentary these statements are described as relating to the appearance of the holy body of emanation.


[4410]
SPRUL PA’I SKU ‘BYUNG BA’I RGYU ZHES PA CHOS KYI SKU LA DGONGS ZHES ‘CHAD PA YANG MI RIGS TE, CHOS KYI SKUR GSHEGS PA’I TSAD DE TZAM DU ‘DOD NA GANG ZAG GZHAN SANGS RGYA BA’I SKABS MED PA’I SKYON DER YANG ‘JUG PA’I PHYIR DANG,

Nor would it be correct to say that the phrase “cause for the appearance of the holy body of emanation” was meant to refer to the holy body of all things.  If we were to accept that as the measure of what it took to reach the holy body of all things, then there arises the additional problem that there wouldn’t have been sufficient time for any other individuals to have reached enlightenment.


[4411]
SANGS RGYAS THAMS CAD KYI CHOS SKU GCIG YIN NA SANGS RGYAS SNGA MA RNAMS SANGS RGYAS PA’I TSE, SNGAR SANGS MA RGYAS PA DANG ‘TSANG RGYA RGYU’I CHOS SKU YANG SNGON DU THOB ZIN PA SHIN TU ‘GAL BA’I PHYIR RO,,

If the holy bodies of all things belonging to each and every one of the Buddhas were all but a single body of all things, then at the point when the earlier Buddhas reached their Buddhahood, the bodies of all things belonging to those who had not earlier reached their enlightenment, and those who were still to reach their enlightenment, would already have been attained.  And that would be a total contradiction.


[4412]
DES NA BYANG CHUB KYI SNYING POR GSHEGS PA’I TSAD STON PA YIN LA, DE YANG SNGON DU SANGS RGYAS NAS KYI YUN TSAD STON PA MA YIN PAS, SANGS RGYAS NAS SLAR YANG BYANG CHUB KYI SNYING POR SPRUL SKU’I ‘TSANG RGYA TSUL STON PA’I GRANGS TSAD STON PA YIN NO,,

As such, what’s being indicated is the measure of time needed to travel to the heart of enlightenment; it is not meant to describe the amount of time passed since that earlier point when one had become enlightened.  As such, we can say that the number being described is the time it takes an emanation to pretend to reach enlightenment, in the very heart of enlightenment—all after we had already actually become a Buddha.


[4413]
DE LTAR [f. 284b] NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS,
,SANGS RGYAS YUL GYUR ZHING RNAMS
PHYOGS BCU MA LUS NA,
,PHRA RAB RDUL NI JI SNYED
YOD PA DE SNYED DU,
,BDE BAR GSHEGS PA MCHOG GYUR
KHYOD KYI BYANG CHUB KYANG,
,’BYUNG ‘GYUR
ZHES ‘BYUNG BA LTAR LEGS SO,,

Thus it is that Naktso’s translation of the root text at this point is well done:

	There are all the lands
	Of Enlightened Beings,

	Paradises in every
	Corner of the universe.

	And in them there are
	A certain number of atoms.

	This is how long
	It takes you, Highest Ones,

Those Gone to Bliss,
To reach your
Enlightenment too.


[4414]
DE LTAR MA BYAS PAR ‘GREL BSHAD LTAR BSHAD NA, RTZA BA LAS GSANG BA ‘DI BSHAD PAR MI BYA BAR GSUNGS PA’I YUL DU ‘GRO BA YIN NO,,

If we decide not to read the lines this way, and rather follow thread of the Explanation in our thinking, there is a danger that we would end up being the type of people who are being described—in the root text—as being those with whom this secret should not be shared!



Residing in total enlightenment

[4415]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to our second part from above: an explanation relative to the point at which one is residing in total enlightenment.


	[4416]
[afterword.49]
Sanskrit unavailable

,RGYAL BA JI SRID ‘JIG RTEN MTHA’ DAG
MCHOG TU RAB ZHI BAR,
,’GRO BA MIN ZHING NAM MKHA’ RNAM ‘JIG
‘GYUR MIN DE SRID DU,
,SHES RAB YUM GYIS BSKYED PA KHYOD LA
THUGS BRTZE MA MA YIS,
,TSUL LUGS BYED PAS RAB TU ZHI BAR
‘GYUR BA GANG LA MNGA’,

		A Victor remains
		Until all the world

		Reaches to that
		Highest state
		Of absolute peace,

		And also
		Until that day
		When space itself
		Comes to its
		Complete dissolution.

		They have been
		Given birth by
		The Mother,
		Wisdom, and then

		Compassion,
		Acting in the manner
		Of a wet nurse.
		
		How then could
		We ever say
		That you possessed
		Some total peace?


[4417]
RGYAL BA’I MA ‘ONGS PA’I SKU TSE’I TSAD NI JI SRID DU ‘JIG RTEN GDUL BYA MTHA’ DAG GO ‘PHANG MCHOG TU RAB TU ZHI BAR ‘GRO BA MIN PA LTE {%STE} SANGS RGYAS SU MA RGYUR PA’I BAR DANG, JI SRID DU ‘DUS MA BYAS KYI NAM MKHA’ RNAM PAR ‘JIG PAR ‘GYUR BA MIN PA DE SRID DU YIN TE, 

The length of life, into the future, for the holy body of a Victor is that it will remain until “all the world”—meaning disciples—is able to reach to that highest state of absolute peace; which is to say, until they become Buddhas themselves.  We can also say that this body remains until that day when space itself—which is nothing that was ever produced—comes to its complete dissolution.


[4418]
SANGS RGYAS NI SHES RAB KYI PHA ROL TU PHYIN PA’I YUM GYIS BSKYED NAS THUGS BRTZE BA CHEN PO YI MA MA LA GTAD PA LAS SNGAR BSHAD PA’I TSUL LUGS ‘DI BYED PAS,

Now a Buddha is a person who has been given birth by the “Mother”—referring to the perfection of wisdom—and then been handed over to the wet nurse of great compassion, acting in the manner that we described before.


[4419]
DE ‘DRA BA KHYOD LA ZHI BA PHYOGS GCIG PAR ‘GYUR BA GA LA MNGA’ STE MI MNGA’ BA’I PHYIR RO,,

How then could we ever say that you possessed a peace here that was only partial?  You never could.


[4420]
GANG GIS SEMS CAN THAMS CAD KYI DON BSGRUB PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR DU MU MTHA’ MED PAR SEMS CAN ‘DI DAG GSO BAR BYED PA SANGS RGYAS RNAMS KYI THUGS RJE DE JI ‘DRA BA ZHIG CE NA,

One may come then with the following question:

Can you describe the compassion of the Enlightened Ones, who—in order to bring about the goals of each & every living being—sustain these beings endlessly?


	[4421]
[afterword.50]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GTI MUG SKYON GYIS ‘JIG RTEN KHA ZAS
DUG BCAS ZA BA YI,
,SKYE BO NYID KYI NANG MI DE LA
KHYOD BRTZE JI LTA BA,
,DE LTAR DUG ZOS NYEN PA’I BU LA
MA YI SDUG BSNGAL MIN,
,DES NA MGON PO MCHOG TU RAB ZHIR
GSHEGS PAR ‘GYUR MA LAGS,

		Due to the problem
		Of dark ignorance,

		Those of the world
		Eat a meal containing
		A certain poison.

		Love comes
		Into you for them,
		The members of
		Your own family.

		This is not
		The suffering
		That a mother feels
		For a beloved child

		Who has,
		In a similar way,
		Mistakenly eaten
		Some poison;

		Which means
		That it is not
		The case that

		The Protectors
		Have travelled
		Only to some

		Supreme and
		Final peace.


[4422]
BDEN ‘DZIN GYI GTI MUG GI SKYON GYI DBANG GIS ‘JIG RTEN PA RNAMS KHA ZAS TE ‘DOD YON LNGA LA MNGON PAR ZHEN PAS ZOS PAS,

Due to the problem of the dark ignorance of grasping to some real existence, those of the world consume a specific meal—out of their craving for the five objects of desire, of the senses.


[4423]
SDUG BSNGAL RGYA CHEN PO’I RGYU BYED PA’I PHYIR DUG DANG BCAS PA ZA BA PO YI SKYE BO NYID KYI NANG MI STE BDAG GI BAR BYAS PA DE RNAMS LA KHYOD BRTZE BA SKYE BA

And there is a certain poison contained in this food that acts as a cause of massive suffering, for the one who eats it.  And so love comes into your heart for them: you treat these very people as members of your own family: you make them your own.


[4424]
JI LTA BA DE LTAR DU DUG ZOS NAS NYEN PA’I BU GCIG PU LA MA YI SDUG BSNGAL GYI [f. 285a] YID SKYE BA MIN TE, DE BAS NA MGON PO SANGS RGYAS RNAMS MCHOG TU RAB TU ZHI BA PHYOGS GCIG PAR GSHEGS PAR ‘GYUR BA MA LAGS SO,,

This is not though like the intense feelings of suffering that a mother feels for a beloved, only child who has, in a similar way, mistakenly eaten some poison.  Which means that it is not the case that the Protectors, the Enlightened Beings, have travelled only to some one part of the supreme and final peace.


	[4425]
[afterword.51]
Sanskrit unavailable

,GANG GI PHYIR NA MI MKHAS DNGOS DANG
DNGOS MED PAR ZHEN PA YI BLO CAN GYIS,
,SKYE DANG ‘JIG GNAS SKABS DANG SDUG DANG
MI SDUG BRAL PHRAD KYIS BSKYED SDUG BSNGAL DANG,
,SDIG CAN ‘GRO BA ‘THOB PA DE PHYIR
‘JIG RTEN THUGS BRTZE’I YUL DU RAB DONG BAS,
,BCOM LDAN THUGS RJES KHYOD THUGS ZHI LAS
BZLOG PAS KHYOD LA MYA NGAN ‘DAS MI MNGA’,

		What is the
		Reason for this?

		It is all because
		Those who are
		Not well versed

		Still possess
		A state of mind
		Where they have
		Strong craving.

		And because of this,
		They undergo
		Periods when they
		Are born & destroyed.

		They are torn
		From what feels
		Attractive, and
		Meet with
		The undesirable;

		They achieve
		The future fate of
		Those who still have
		Terrible deeds.

		The world
		Has crowded to
		Worthy objects
		Of compassion.

		As such, you—
		The Conqueror—
		Have, out of
		This compassion,

		Turned your heart
		Away from peace,

		Without allowing
		Yourself to go
		Into nirvana.	


[4426]
GANG GI PHYIR NA DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON LA MI MKHAS PAS DNGOS PO LA BDEN PAR MNGON PAR ZHEN PA’I BLO CAN LAS ‘BRAS LA YID CHES PAS LHA DANG MIR SKYE BA YOD PAR LTA BA RNAMS KYIS NI,

And what is the reason for this?  It is all because those who are not well versed in the meaning of suchness still possess a state of mind where they have a strong craving for taking entities as existing in truth.  Because of this, they put their faith in the laws of karma and its consequences, and thus believe that rebirths as a worldly god or human do exist.


[4427]
SKYE BA DANG ‘JIG PA’I GNAS SKABS TE ‘CHI BA’I SDUG BSNGAL NGES PAR ‘THEB CING,

And because of this, in turn, they are quite certainly stricken by “periods when they are born, and periods when they are destroyed”: a reference to the suffering of dying.


[4428]
YUL SDUG PA DANG BRAL BA DANG, MI SDUG PA DANG PHRAD PA YIS BSKYED PA’I SDUG BSNGAL MYONG BAR ‘GYUR LA,

And they undergo as well all the suffering which is triggered by being torn from all those things that feel attractive to them; and meeting up with all those things that seem to them undesirable.


[4429]
RGYU ‘BRAS KYI DNGOS PO MED PAR ZHEN PA’I BLO CAN LOG PAR LTA BA DANG LDAN PAS NI, SDIG TO CAN GYI ‘GRO BA DMYAL BA LA SOGS PA’I NGAN ‘GRO DANG, SNGAR BSHAD PA’I SDUG BSNGAL YANG ‘THOB PA DE’I PHYIR DANG,

Those who are possessed of wrong view, where they feel a craving for causes & effects which are not even actual things, end up achieving no more than the “future fate of those who still have terrible deeds”—a reference to the realms of hell, and other lower rebirths, along with all the sufferings that we described above.


[4430]
‘JIG RTEN GYI SKYE BO DE RNAMS THUGS BRTZE BA CHEN PO’I YUL DU RAB TU DONG BA STE SONG BAS NA, THUGS RJE CHEN POS BCOM LDAN ‘DAS KHYOD KYI THUGS ZHI BA PHYOGS GCIG PA LA GZHOL BA LAS BZLOG PAS KHYOD LA ZHI BA PHYOGS GCIG PA’I MYA NGAN LAS ‘DAS PA MI MNGA’ BAR ‘JIG RTEN DU BZHUGS SO,,

The beings of this world have “crowded to”—have become—worthy objects of great compassion.  As such, “you”—the Conqueror—have, out of this great compassion, turned away from allowing your heart to be lost to but a partial state of peace.  That is, you remain here in the world, but without allowing yourself to go into a kind of nirvana which represents one side of the condition of peace.



How the commentary was composed

[4431]
GSUM PA BSTAN BCOS JI LTAR BRTZAMS PA’I TSUL NI,

And this now brings us to our third great division from the beginning of our text: a description of how it was that the commentary was first composed.


	[4432]
[colophon.1]
Sanskrit unavailable

,LUGS ‘DI DGE SLONG ZLA GRAGS KYIS,
,DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS LAS BTUS NAS,
,LUNG JI BZHIN DANG MAN NGAG NI,
,JI LTA BA BZHIN BRJOD PA YIN,

		This presentation
		Has been related
		By the Buddhist monk
		Known as Chandrakirti.

		It has proceeded
		From that classical
		Commentary of
		The middle way,

		And is in accord with
		The traditional sources,
		And the personal advices.


[4433]
MGON PO KLU SGRUB KYI DGONGS PA PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR ‘GREL PA’I LUGS ‘DI DGE SLONG DPAL LDAN ZLA GRAGS KYIS, DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS RTZA BA SHES RAB SOGS LAS BTUS NAS,

And so this presentation, which comments unerringly upon the true intent of our Savior, Nagarjuna, has been related by a Buddhist monk known as the glorious Chandrakirti.  My explanation has proceeded from the Root Text on Wisdom—that classical commentary of the middle way.


[4434]
NGES DON GYI MDO SDE RNAMS LUNG JI LTA BA BZHIN DANG, ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYI MAN NGAG NI JI LTA BA BZHIN DU BRJOD PA YIN [f. 285b] NO,,

My presentation is in complete accord with the traditional sources of the sutras which offer a literal presentation of reality; and in keeping as well with the personal advices of the Realized One himself: Nagarjuna.


	[4435]
[colopon.2]
Sanskrit unavailable

,’DI LAS GZHAN NA CHOS ‘DI NI,
,JI LTAR MED PA DE BZHIN DU,
,’DIR ‘BYUNG LUGS KYANG GZHAN NA NI,
,MED CES MKHAS RNAMS NGES PAR MDZOD,

		There is no presentation
		Of this teaching
		To be found in any
		Other than those.

		Just so, real masters
Should be sure
Of one thing:

The system
		That appears here

		Is one that
		You cannot find
		In any of the other.	


[4436]
JI LTAR DBU MA’I GZHUNG LUGS ‘DI LAS MA GTOGS PAR BSTAN BCOS GZHAN NA STONG PA NYID CES BYA BA’I CHOS ‘DI NI, PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR BRJOD PA MED PA

Now there is no entirely unmistaken presentation of this teaching known as “emptiness” to be found in any classical commentary other than those which follow the description found in the system of the great books of the middle way.


[4437]
DE BZHIN DU, KHO BO CAG GIS ‘DIR LUGS GANG ZHIG BRGAL LAN DANG BCAS PAR BSNYED {%BSNYAD} PA ‘DIR ‘BYUNG BA’I LUGS KYANG, STONG PA NYID KYI CHOS LTAR BSTAN BCOS GZHAN NA NI MED DO ZHES MKHAS PA RNAMS KYIS NGES PAR MDZAD DU GSOL LO,,

And we ask those among you who are real masters to be sure of one thing.  As we’ve just said, the system which we have enunciated—the one that appears here, along with our treatment of the objections of other parties—is one that you cannot find in any of the other, different classical commentaries which purport to be teachings on the topic of emptiness.


[4438]
DE’I PHYIR DBU MA PA KHA CIG GIS MDO SDE PA RNAMS DANG, BYE BRAG TU SMRA BA RNAMS KYIS GANG DON DAM PAR SMRAS PA DE NYID, DBU MA PA RNAMS KYIS KUN RDZOB TU ‘DOD DO ZHES SMRAS PA DE NI,

As such, let us say something about statements by certain supposed followers of the middle way who have remarked that those specific items which followers of the Sutrist School, and those of the Detailist School, describe as being the ultimate are actually what those of the Middle Way school assert are deceptive reality.


[4439]
DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS KYI DE KHO NA NYID MA SHES PAS SMRAS PA YIN TE, ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I CHOS NI ‘JIG RTEN PA’I CHOS DANG MTSUNGS PAR MI RIGS PA’I PHYIR RO, ZHES RANG ‘GREL LAS GSUNGS SO,,

Statements like this can only be made by those who have no understanding of suchness as it is presented in the Classical Commentary on the Middle Way.  As the autocommentary puts it, “It would be incorrect to say that things which are beyond the world were equivalent to things within the world.”


[4440]
‘DIS NI RANG GIS THA SNYAD DU RNAM PAR BZHAG PA KHAS BLANGS PA THAMS CAD RANG MTSAN GYIS GRUB PA MED PA NYID LA ‘JOG PAS, RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA KHO NA’I STENG NAS RNAM GZHAG BYAS PA’I DON SMRA GNYIS LA SOGS PA’I GRUB MTHA’ RNAMS RANG LUGS KYI DON DAM DU MA ZAD THA SNYAD DU YANG GRUB PA MED PAR ‘DOD PA’I LUGS SO,,

All this is a reference to a system where we say the following.  Once we accept the presentation of how things are established in terms, then what we are saying is that there is nothing at all which could exist “in actuality.”  And so let’s consider the beliefs expressed by the two Functionalist schools, and the like, who can only posit their own presentations with the assumption of things that could exist “in actuality.”  The actual fact is that, according to our own system, it is not only the case that such objects could not exist in any ultimate way; neither could they exist even nominally.


[4441]
DES NA RANG GI LUGS ‘DI SEMS TZAM PA DANG YANG THUN MONG MA YIN PAR MA ZAD, MGON PO KLU SGRUB DANG ‘PHAGS PA LHA’I DGONGS PA ‘GREL BA’I DBU MA PA GZHAN GYI LUGS DANG YANG THUN MONG MA YIN PAR SHES PAR GYIS SHIG CES ‘DOMS PA PO,,

As such, what our author is actually advising us of here is the following—

Not only should we say that the system that we ourselves are presenting here is nothing held in common even with those of the Mind Only.  You must also understand the point that no one can say, either, that our beliefs are held in common with those of other systems of some thinkers of the Middle Way School who are attempting to comment upon the true intent of our Savior, Nagarjuna, and Aryadeva.


[4442]
[f. 286a] DE LA SLOB DPON SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS KYI ‘GREL PA NI TSAD MAR SLOB DPON ‘DI BZHED PAS, DE LA ZUR ZA BA MIN LA, RGYAL SRAS ZHI BA LHA’I LUGS DANG YANG SLOB DPON ‘DI’I LUGS GNYIS SHIN TU MTHUN PAR SNANG NGO,,

On this point, we should though understand that our Master here does accept the commentary of Buddha Palita as being accurate; as such, we can say that we have no reason to think that it may contain some error.  It would also certainly appear that the system enunciated by that child of the Victors, Shantideva, accords extremely closely to that of our present Master.


[4443]
THA SNYAD DU YANG RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA MED PA’I STENG NAS, BDEN GNYIS KYI RNAM GZHAG MDZAD PA ‘DI LA BRTEN NAS RANG RGYUD KYI GRUB MTHA’ DANG, KUN GZHI MI BZHED PA SOGS KYI BSHAD SROL THUN MONG MA YIN PA MANG DU YOD PA NI, DRANG NGES RNAM ‘BYED LA SOGS PAR RGYAS PAR BSHAD PAS ‘DIR MA SMOS SO,,

And so it is true that—even speaking nominally—there is nothing that could exist by definition.  In addition, we have our presentation here of the two different types of reality.  Based on this, there are many different, unique, systems of explanation—such as the school of the Independent Group, and those who do not accept the concept of a storehouse consciousness.  I have explained all these at great length in works such as Distinguishing the Figurative from the Literal; as such, I will not go into them further here.


[4444]
KHA CIG ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA NI ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD LAS ‘DAS PA GZHAN LUGS DANG, ‘JIG RTEN PA NI RANG GI LUGS SO ZHES ZER BA NI,

Some people have made the claim—as far as the expression “gone beyond the world”—that having gone beyond the verbiage of the world refers to the position of the other side; while “the world” here represents our own position. 


[4445]
‘GREL PA LAS ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I CHOS ‘DI YONGS SU SPANGS PAS ZHES GSUNGS PA DANG ‘GAL BAS NA, BZLOG STE BYA DGOS LA ‘JIG RTEN PA DANG DE LAS ‘DAS PA’I DON NI, DE KHO NA NYID JI BZHIN MA RTOGS PA DANG RTOGS PA’I LUGS SO,,

This though contradicts the autocommentary, where it says, “because they have given up, completely, this teaching which is beyond the world.”  As such, we need to take this in the completely opposite way, where the meaning of “things of the world” and “things gone beyond the world” refers to systems where we either fail to grasp suchness correctly, or do grasp it so.


[4446]
‘PHAGS PA’I DGONGS PA ‘CHAD LUGS ‘DI NI THUN MONG MA YIN PA YIN PA’I PHYIR, ‘PHAGS PA’I THUGS DGONGS MI SHES SHING, GSUNG RAB KYI DE KHO NA NYID NGES PA MED PAR,

This way of explaining the true intent of The Arya is truly unique; as such, there have been people who rejected this teaching beyond the world; this was done by those who had not grasped the true and holy intent of The Arya, and who had not yet ascertained suchness as presented in the scriptures.


[4447]
STONG PA NYID STON PA RNAMS KYI YI GE TZAM LA ‘JIGS PA RNAMS KYIS, ‘JIG RTEN LAS ‘DAS PA’I CHOS ‘DI SPANGS PAS, DE’I PHYIR DBU MA’I BSTAN BCOS KYI DON GYI DE KHO NA NYID PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR BSTAN PAR BYA BA’I PHYIR,

As such they were in fear even of the words being used by those presenting emptiness.  This led them to reject this Dharma, which is so far beyond the normal world.  Thus we have the following lines, which are meant to present—in an unerring manner—the meaning of the Classical Commentary on the Middle Way.


	[4448]
[colophon.3]
Sanskrit unavailable

,KLU SGRUB BLO MTSO SHIN TU RGYA CHE’I
KHA DOG GIS ‘JIGS PAS,
,SKYE BOS LUGS BZANG GANG DAG RGYANG RING
SPANGS PAS DE YI TSIG
,LE’UR BYAS PA’I KHA ‘BUS KU MU
TA {%DA} KHA PHYE BA’I CHUS,
,DA LTA ZLA BA GRAGS PA RE RNAMS
RAB TU SKONG BAR BYED,

		They were frightened
		By the shade
		
		Of the expanse
		Of the ocean

		Of the mind
		Of Nagarjuna.

		And so individuals
		Took the beautiful system
		And discarded it off
		To a distance.

		But the flow
Of pure water
From that one
		Set in verse

		Opened the blooms
		Of a pure white
		Water lily,

		Whose buds had
		Been awaiting it.

		And with this
		Chandrakirti has now
		Fulfilled, perfectly,
		All the hopes.
		

[4449]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA ‘DI SBYAR BA YIN NO ZHES BSHAD PA [f. 286b] ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYI ZAB MO RTOGS PA’I BLO’I RGYA MTSO SHIN TU RGYA CHE LA GTING DPAG PAR DKA’ BA’I NGAM GNAG PA’I KHA DOG GIS ‘JIGS PAS,

The fact is that people became frightened when they heard someone say, “I will now compose Entering the Middle Way”—frightened simply when they saw the shade of the ebony abyss of depths so impossible to fathom, within the vast expanse of the ocean of that mind which could plumb the deeps of Arya Nagarjuna.


[4450]
SEMS TZAM DU SMRA BA LA SOGS PA’I SKYO {%SKYE} BOS KLU SGRUB KYI LUGS BZANG PO GANG DAG RGYANG RING DU SPANGS MOD KYANG,

Now it is indeed the case that individuals like those who follow the Mind Only school have only rejected the beautiful system of Nagarjuna, discarding it off to a great distance.


[4451]
DBU MA’I GZHUNG GI TSIG LE’UR BYAS PA KHA ‘BUS PA’I KU MU DA KHA PHYE BA’I CHUS KU MU DA KHA ‘BYED BYED ZLA BA GRAGS PA DA LTA YID LA RE BA RNAMS SKONG BAR BYED DO,,

But along came a refreshing flow of pure water—a classic of the middle way set in verse—which opened the blooms of a pure white water lily, whose buds had been awaiting it.  And with this liquid, the one who crafted the lily-opener—Chandrakirti—has now fulfilled all the hopes of those who had held them in their heart.


[4452]
GAL TE DE LTA YIN NA GNAS BRTAN DBYIG GNYEN DANG, PHYOGS KYI GLANG PO DANG, CHOS SKYONG LA SOGS PA BSTAN BCOS RNAMS KYI MDZAD PA PO BYON ZIN PAR GYUR PA

One may then raise the following question:

If things are really the way they’re described in those last few lines, then let’s consider respected elders such as Vasubandhu, Dignaga, Dharmapala, and all the rest: those of the past who have composed their own classical commentaries.


[4453]
DE DAG GIS KYANG YI GE TZAM THOS PAS ‘JIGS TE, RTEN CING ‘BREL BAR ‘BYUNG BA’I DON PHYIN CI MA LOG PAR STON PA ‘DI YONGS SU SPANG SAM ZHE NA,

Are you saying that they too were frightened, just by hearing the words we’ve been talking about?  Are you saying that they rejected, entirely, this unmistaken teaching on the way that things occur in dependence and interrelationship?


[4454]
DE SKAD DU SMRA’O, ,DE LTAR GSUNGS PA LA DBYIG GNYEN DANG PHYOGS GLANG GI GZHUNG RTZOD MED RNAMS NAS NI, RNAM PAR RIG PA TZAM GYI LUGS SU BKRAL MOD KYANG, SLOB DPON DE DAG GI BZHED PA JI LTAR YIN PA NI BDAG CAG ‘DRA BA RNAMS KYIS SHIN TU RTOGS PAR DKA’O,,

Here then is what we would say to that.  Now it is true that the great classics of Vasubandhu and Dignaga are indisputable, with regard to these statements; that is, they have interpreted these ideas according to the school which says that everything is mind.  Nonetheless, it is an extremely difficult task for people like you and me to truly understand just what these masters really thought.


[4455]
YANG ZAB MO’I DON ‘DI SU ZHIG GIS RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR ZHE NA,

And then one might come with another question: “Well then, who is it exactly that actually did grasp this profound thought?”


	[4456]
[colophon.4]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DE NYID BSHAD ZIN ZAB MO ‘JIGS RUNG
‘DI NI [219a] SNGON GOMS NYID LAS SKYE BO YIS,
,NGES PAR RTOGS ‘GYUR ‘DI NI GSAN RGYA
CHE YANG GZHAN GYIS THUGS SU CHUD MI ‘GYUR,
,DE PHYIR TSUL LUGS RANG BLOS SBYAR BA
‘DI DAG MTHONG NAS BDAG TU BRJOD PA YI,
,GZHUNG LUGS RNAMS LTAR GZHAN LUGS BZHED GZHUNG
‘DI LAS GZHAN LA DGA’ BLO DOR BAR BYA,

		The profound idea
		Of suchness

		Which we have
		Finished explaining
		Can be frightening [f. 219a].

		There are individuals
		Who have, previous,
		Become highly accustomed,
		And did have
		Such realizations.

		Others may possess
		Vast learning,
		
		And yet still
		They would not
		Be able to grasp this.

		And thus it is that
		Any system where
		We see these ideas

		That people have
		Made up in
		Their own mind

		We note that they
		Are just the same
		As if they were following

		The scriptural traditions
		Of those who describe
		Some self-nature.

		As such,
		I would encourage you
		To discard that
		State of mind where

		You take some kind
		Of pleasure in
		The texts of those

		Who adhere
		To some other
		School of thought.


[4457]
DE KHO NA NYID KYI DON ZAB MO SNGAR BSHAD ZIN PA ‘JIGS SU RUNG BA ‘DI NI SKYE BO YIS, SNGON TSE RABS GZHAN DU STONG PA NYID LA LHAG PAR MOS PA’I BAG CHAGS GOMS PA NYID LAS NGES PAR RTOGS PAR ‘GYUR BA SNANG NGO,,

Let us consider then this profound idea of suchness, which we have finished explaining here, and which is in fact likely to be frightening.  There are individuals who have, in their past—during their previous lifetimes—become highly accustomed to deep seeds created by their intense aspiration for emptiness.  And it would certainly appear that, because of these seeds, they did have such realizations.


[4458]
‘DIR NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, MU STEGS KYI GZHUNG LUGS DMAN PAR GYUR PA ‘DI BDEN PAR LTA BA CAN DAG LAS KYANG, RGYU’I STOBS KYIS STONG PA NYID RTOGS PAR [f. 287a] GYUR PA MTHONG BA YIN NO, ZHES ‘BYUNG BA PA TSAB KYI ‘GYUR LAS LEGS PAR SNANG NGO,,

At this point, Naktso’s translation would seem preferable to Patsab’s:

Given sufficient power of the appropriate causes, even the texts of the River Schools—inferior as they are—can lead those who perceive things as real to seeing themselves come to a realization of emptiness.


[4459]
JI LTAR GZHAN SDE SNGON SEMS RGYUD LA STONG NYID LA LHAG PAR MOS PA’I BAG CHAGS MA BZHAG PA RNAMS KYIS MNGON PA NAS BSHAD PA LTAR SRID RTZE MA GTOGS PA’I KHAMS GSUM GYI NYON MONGS MNGON GYUR RE ZHIG SPANGS SHING, GRUB PA’I MTHA’ GZHAN NYE BAR SBYOR NUS PAR MTHONG YANG,

And so let’s consider members of these other groups, who may not have—at some prior point in time—planted any deep seeds inside their mindstreams that would make them feel some strong aspiration towards emptiness.  As explained in the texts on higher knowledge, they might still be able to eliminate—for a certain amount of time—different negative emotions for all three of the realms, except for that level known as the Peak of Existence.  And we might observe them being able to apply themselves to other philosophical systems.


[4460]
SANGS RGYAS KYIS GSUNGS PA’I DON DAM PA STONG PA NYID STON PA LA LHAG PAR MOS MI NUS PA DE BZHIN DU, SLOB DPON DE DAG LA GSUNG RAB MANG DU GSAN PA RGYA CHE PA MNGA’ BA YIN YANG, ZAB MO’I DON ‘DI NI GZHAN GYIS THUGS SU CHUD PAR MI ‘GYUR RO,,

Still though they would be unable to aspire, in any great degree, to the teachings on emptiness in the form of ultimate reality, as these were described by the Buddha.  Just so, it may well be the case that these other masters may possess vast learning in a great variety of the scriptures; and yet still they would not be able to grasp this profound concept.


[4461]
DE’I PHYIR DBU MA’I LUGS LAS GZHAN PA’I DON DAM PA STON PA’I TSUL LUGS SANGS RGYAS KYI DGONGS PAR MA SONG BAS RANG GI BLOS SBYAR BA ‘DI DAG MTHONG BA STE BLTAS NAS, GANG ZAG GI BDAG TU BRJOD PA STE DE GSAL BAR BYED PA’I GZHUNG LUGS RNAMS LA BYA BA LTAR,

And thus it is that we can say that any system of teaching ultimate reality which is other than that of the followers of the middle way fails to capture the true intent of the Buddha.  As such, where we “see” or consider these ideas that people have made up in their own mind, we note that they are behaving just the same as if they were following the scriptural traditions of those who “describe” or elucidate some self-nature to the person.


[4462]
SLOB DPON GZHAN GYI LUGS KYI BZHED PA’I GZHUNG DBU MA’I LUGS ‘DI LAS GZHAN PA RNAMS LA DGA’ BA’I BLO DOR BAR BYA BA STE,

As such, I would encourage you to discard that state of mind where you take some kind of pleasure in systems other than that of the middle-way approach that we have described here—give up the texts of those masters who adhere to some other school of thought.


[4463]
LUGS GZHAN RANG GI BLOS SBYAR BA LA YA MTSAN PAR MI BYA’I, RANG GI STONG PA NYID KYI LTA BA LA LHAG PAR MOS PA KHO NA LA YA MTSAN PAR BYA’O,,

That is, give up any kind of attitude where you take these other systems—which people have simply made up on their own—as being something really amazing.  The only thing you should really feel amazed at is a very strong aspiration to follow the viewpoints of emptiness that we already have in our hands.



A dedication of the good deed

[4464]
BZHI PA BSTAN BCOS BRTZAMS PA’I DGE BA BSNGO BA NI,

This brings us to our fourth section from above: a dedication of the virtue of having completed the composition.


	[4465]
[colophon.5]
Sanskrit unavailable

,SLOB DPON KLU SGRUB LUGS BZANG BSNYAD LAS
BDAG GIS BSOD RNAMS PHYOGS KYI MTHAR,
,KHYAB CING YID MKHA’ NYON MONGS KYIS SNGOR
STON KA’I RGYU SKAR STAR DKAR BA’AM,
,SEMS KYI SBRUL LA GDENGS KA’I NOR BU
DANG ‘DRA GANG ZHIG THOB PA DES,
,’JIG RTEN MA LUS DE NYID RTOGS NAS
MYUR DU BDE GSHEGS SAR BGROD SHOG,

		Thus have I
		Enunciated that
		Beautiful system
		Of the Master,
		Nagarjuna.

		And by doing so,
		I have merit enough
		To stretch to the
		Very edges of
		Space itself.

		The sky of my mind
		Had been sent into
		The gloom of the
		Negative emotions.

		But now,
		In the midst,
		Has come a bright
		White light like
		
		A major star in
		The autumn heavens.

		Or else you could say
		That here is a mind
		Which resembles
		That fabulous jewel

		Which a cobra holds
		Embedded in their hood;

		And the acquisition of such
		Will allow the entire world
		To perceive suchness;

		And then may it happen
		That—with great speed—
		Every being completes
		Their journey to the level
		Of One Gone to Bliss.


[4466]
SLOB DPON CHEN PO ‘PHAGS PA KLU SGRUB KYI DBU MA’I LUGS BZANG PO LUNG DANG RIGS PA’I TSOGS SHIN TU GSAL BAS, BSNYAD PA STE BSHAD PA 

Thus then have I “enunciated”—which is to say, explained—that beautiful middle-way system of the great Master, The Arya, Nagarjuna; and I have done so by using perfectly clear examples of entire collections of both scriptural authority and logical reasoning.


[4467]
LAS BYUNG BA’I BDAG GIS [f. 287b] PHYOGS KYI MTHAR KHYAB PA’I RGYA CHE BA’I BSOD NAMS BSAGS PA,

And by doing so, I have myself accumulated a massive amount of merit—enough to stretch to the very edges of space itself.


[4468]
YID KYI NAM MKHA’ NYON MONGS PA’I TSOGS KYIS SNGO ZHING GNAG PAR BYAS PA’I DKYIL DU, STON KA’I RGYU SKAR LTAR SHIN TU DKAR BA’AM,

The sky of my mind, thus far, had been sent into the gloom—darkened—by an entire mass of everything related to the negative emotions.  But now, in the midst of that obscuration, something has come, shining in bright white light like a major star in the autumn heavens.


[4469]
RTZOM PA PO’I SEMS KYI SBRUL LA STE GYI GDENGS KA’I NOR BU DANG ‘DRA BA GANG ZHIG THOB PA DE YI MTHUS, SEMS CAN GYI ‘JIG RTEN MA LUS PAS ZAB MO’I DE KHO NA NYID JI LTA BA BZHIN DU RTOGS NAS,

Or else you could say that the author of our text has a mind which resembles that fabulous jewel which a cobra is said to hold embedded in their hood—which is part of their hood.  And the power of their acquisition of such mental capacity will allow the entire world—every living being, without a single exception—to perceive, just as it is, that profound truth of suchness.


[4470]
MYUR DU BDE BAR GSHEGS PA’I SA KUN TU ‘OD CES BYA BAR BGROD PAR SHOG CIG

And then may it happen that—with great speed—every being completes their journey to the level of One Gone to Bliss: the level we call “Drowned in Light.”


[4471]
,NAG TSO’I ‘GYUR LAS, KLU SGRUB LUGS MDZES PHYOGS SU GRAGS PA BRJOD LAS THOB PA’I BSOD NAMS GANG, ZHES ‘BYUNG NGO,,

Naktso’s translation at this point includes the phrasing, “The merit that I have achieved, by proclaiming that lovely system of Nagarjuna throughout every corner of the world.”



The master who composed the work

[4472]
BZHI PA MJUG GI DON LA GNYIS, SLOB DPON GANG GIS MDZAD PA DANG, LO PAn GANG GIS BSGYUR BA’O, ,DANG PO NI,

And then with this we have reached that fourth part, the meaning of the conclusion to the text.  This we cover in two sections: identifying the Master who composed the work; and then identifying the ancient translators and sages who rendered it into Tibetan.


	[4473]
[colophon.6]
Sanskrit unavailable

,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I TSUL GSAL BAR BYED PA SLOB DPON ZLA BA GRAGS PA THEG PA MCHOG LA THUGS GZHOL BA,

This then completes Entering the Middle Way, an illumination of the ways of both the profound and the widespread.  It was composed by Master Chandrakirti, whose holy heart had long since been lost to that highest way.


	[4474]
[colophon.7]
Sanskrit unavailable

,MI PHROGS PA’I MKHYEN RAB DANG THUGS RJE MNGA’ BA, ,RI MOR BRIS PA’I BA DRUS LAS ‘O MA BZHOS PAS BDEN PAR ZHEN PA BZLOG PAR MDZAD PAS SBYAR BA RDZOGS SO,,

He held a high level of knowledge that was never stolen away; and he possessed compassion as well.  He was known for sketching a cow that was about to give birth, and then milking real milk from it.  With this, he was able to stop others from believing that things are real.  This then is the one who completed this composition.


[4475]
DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA KLU’I LUGS KYI ZAB PA DANG RGYA CHE BA’I TSUL GSAL BAR BYED PA

This then completes Entering the Middle Way, an illumination of the ways of both the profound and the widespread, according to the system of Arya Nagarjuna.


[4476]
YUL SA MAntAR SKU ‘KHRUNGS PA’I SLOB DPON CHEN PO DPAL LDAN ZLA BA GRAGS PA RIG PA ‘DZIN PA DANG, SGYU MA LTA BU’I TING NGE ‘DZIN BRNYES PAR GRAGS PA

It was composed by that great master, the glorious Chandrakirti, who took his holy birth in the land of India, at a place known as Samanta.  This sage was a holder of the various traditions of classical knowledge, and a person known as having achieved that level of meditative concentration we call “Like an Illusion.”


[4477]
THEG PA BLA NA MED PA’I MCHOG LA THUGS RAB TU GZHOL BA, MI MTHUN PA’I PHYOGS KYIS MI ‘PHROGS PA’I MKHYEN RAB DANG THUGS RJE PHUL DU BYUNG BA MNGA’ BA,

His holy heart had long since been lost to that highest way: the unsurpassed way.  Master Chandrakirti held a high level of knowledge that was never stolen away by mistaken ideas; and he possessed the most excellent form of compassion as well.


[4478]
RI MOR BRIS PA’I BA DRUS MA LA ‘O MA BZHOS PAS SEMS CAN GYI BDEN PAR ZHEN PA ZLOG PAR MDZAD PAS

He was known as well for one day sitting down and sketching a cow that was about to give birth; and then milking that cow and coming out with real milk.  With this, he was able to stop the habit that others around him had, for believing that things are real.


[4479]
SBYAR BA RDZOGS SO,,

This then is the one who completed this composition.



The translators who created
the Tibetan version

[4480]
GNYIS PA NI,

Which brings us to identifying the ancient translators and sages who rendered this work into Tibetan.


	[4481]
[translators.1]
,,KHA CHE’I YUL GYI GRONG KHYER DPE MED KYI DBUS, ,RIN CHEN SBAS PA’I GTZUG LAG KHANG DU, ,KHA CHE’I RGYAL PO DPAL ‘PHAGS PA LHA’I SKU RING LA,

This was translated in the middle of the Kashmiri town known as Anupama, or “Beyond All Compare,” within the temple whose name is “Hidden Jewels.”  This was during the time of the Kashmiri king whose name was Aryadeva.


	[4482]
[translators.2]
,RGYA GAR GYI MKHAN PO TI LA KA DANG, ,BOD KYI LO TZTSA BA BANDE PA TSAB NYI MA GRAGS KYIS KHA CHE’I DPE DANG MTHUN PAR BSGYUR,

The translation of the text was done according to the Sanskrit edition of the work circulating at that time in Kashmir.  The team that completed the translation consisted of the senior Indian cleric Tilaka, together with the master Tibetan translator, the Buddhist monk Patsab Nyima Drak.


[4483]
KHA CHE’I YUL GYI GRONG KHYER DPE MED KYI DPUNG STE DBUS, RIN CHEN SBAS PA’I GTZUG LAG KHANG DU

This classical text was translated “in the middle”—which is to say, in the crowded quarters—of the Kashmiri town known as Anupama, or “Beyond All Compare,” within the temple whose name is “Hidden Jewels.”


[4484]
KHA CHE’I RGYAL PO DPAL ‘PHAGS PA [f. 288a] LHA’I SKU RING LA, RGYA GAR GYI MKHAN PO TI LA KA KA LA SHA STE THIG LE BUM PA DANG, BOD KYI LO TZ’A BA PA TSAB NYI MA GRAGS KYIS KHA CHE’I DPE DANG MTHUN PAR BSGYUR,

This was during the time of the Kashmiri king whose name was Aryadeva.  The translation of the text was done according to the Sanskrit edition of the work circulating at that time in Kashmir.  The team that completed the translation consisted of the senior Indian cleric Tilaka Kalasha (whose name means “Vase of the Sacred Drop”), together with the master Tibetan translator Patsab Nyima Drak.


	[4485]
[translators.3]
,PHYIS RA SA RA MO CHER RGYA GAR GYI MKHAN PO KA NA KA WARMA DANG, ,LO TZTSA BA DE NYID KYIS NYI ‘OG SHAR PHYOGS PA’I DPE DANG GTUGS SHING LEGS PAR BCOS TE GTAN LA PHAB PA’O,,

Later on, at the Ramoche Temple in the city of Lhasa, the senior Indian cleric by the name of Kanaka Varma and the same master Tibetan translator were able to review a copy of the Sanskrit text that had been circulating in the eastern part of Bactria.  This allowed them to complete an accurate revision of the Tibetan translation, and then finalize it through their efforts to teach it to their students.


[4486]
PHYIS RA SA RA MO CHER RGYA GAR GYI MKHAN PO KA NA KA WA RMA STE GSER GYI GO CHA DANG, LO TZ’A BA DE NYID KYIS NYI ‘OG SHAR PHYOGS PA’I DPE DANG GTUGS SHING, LEGS PAR BCOS NAS ‘CHAD NYAN GYIS GTAN LA PHAB PA’O,,

Later on, at the Ramoche Temple in the city of Lhasa, the senior Indian cleric by the name of Kanaka Varma (“Armor of Gold”) and the same master Tibetan translator were able to review a copy of the Sanskrit text that had been circulating in the eastern part of Bactria.  This allowed them to complete an accurate revision of the translation into Tibetan, and then finalize it through their efforts to teach it to their students.


	[4487]
[translators.4]
‘DIR ‘GREL PA’I MDZAD BYANG DANG, ,’GYUR BYANG GI STENG NAS THUN MONG BA RNAMS BKOD PA NI, ,RTZA BA LOGS SU BSGYUR BA DANG ‘GREL PA’I NANG GI RTZA BA DE GNYIS SBYAR NAS ZHUS DAG DBANG DU BYAS PA YIN NO,,

Why then do we see one colophon for the composition of the commentary itself, and then a shared colophon for the translation?  This is because the root text was translated once on its own, and then edited as part of a combined version of the commentary and the root text presented within it.


[4488]
` ,,’DI’I ‘GREL PA’I MDZAD BYANG DANG, ‘GYUR BYANG GI STENG NAS THUN MONG BA RNAMS BKOD PA NI, RTZA BA LOGS SU BSGYUR BA DANG ‘GREL PA’I NANG GI RTZA BA GNYIS SBYAR NAS ZHUS DAG BYAS PA’I DBANG DU BYAS PA YIN NO,,

Why then do we see one colophon for the composition of the commentary itself, and then a shared colophon for the translation?  This is because the root text was translated once on its own, and then edited as part of a combined version of the commentary and the root text presented within it.



How Je Tsongkapa
composed his commentary

[4489]
,RGYAL BA’I GSUNG RAB KUN GYI SNYING PO MCHOG
,ZAB MO DBU MA MTHA’ BRAL RTEN ‘BYUNG LAM,
,MTHA’ GNYIS SPANGS TE STON PAR LUNG BSTAN BZHIN,
,JI BZHIN ‘GREL MDZAD ‘PHAGS MCHOG KLU SGRUB ZHABS,

	It is the supreme heart
	Of all the high speech
	Of the Victors;

	It is the profound path
	Of the middle way,
	Occurrence in dependence,
	Free of all extremes.

	And there was one
	Who was prophesized
	To come and teach it,
	Free of the two extremes.

	I bow at the feet
	Of that highest of all
	The realized beings:
	
	Nagarjuna,
	Who explained this path
	As it really is.


[4490]
,DE YI RING LUGS DAM PA ‘PHAGS PA LHA’I,
,DGONGS PA ‘GREL PA’I MKHAS PA’I LUGS MANG YANG,
,YONGS RDZOGS ‘GREL MDZAD DPAL LDAN SANGS RGYAS BSKYANGS,
,ZLA BA’I ZHABS DANG ZHI BA LHA YI LUGS,

	Now there are many systems
	Of masters who commented
	Upon the true thought
	Of Aryadeva, who carried on
	This Arya’s system of thought.

	But the ones who explained it
	In total fullness were the systems
Of the glorious Buddhapalita,
The venered Chandrakirti,
And Master Shantideva.


[4491]
,GRUB PA’I DBANG PHYUG GSUM GYI BZHED PA’I SGO,
,GCIG TU DRIL NAS GNAD RNAMS MTHA’ CHOD PAR,
,TSIG ZUR PHYIN PAR LEGS PAR BSHAD PA YIS,
,THAL ‘GYUR LUGS MCHOG DRI MA MED PAR BYAS,

	The doorways of the positions
	Taken by these three lords
	Among the accomplished

	Were combined into one,
	Giving fine explanations
	Of the crucial points
	In a definitive way,
	Down to the last syllable.

	Thus then was the supreme
	System of the Consequence Group,
	Free of all impurity, created.


[4492]
,BYANG PHYOGS ‘DI NA LUGS ‘DIR MOS RNAMS KYANG,
,SHIN TU PHRA BA’I RIGS LAM MI BYED CING,
,ZAB MO’I DON LA SKAL BA DMAN PA RNAMS,
,RANG GIS MA RTOGS LUGS MCHOG ‘DIR [f. 288b] SMOD PA,

	Here in the Northern Land,
	Those attracted to this system
	Were however unable
	
	To follow its path
	Of extremely subtle reasoning.

	These were persons
	Who lacked sufficient fortune
	To grasp its deepest points;

	And thus did they begin
	To denigrate here
	That supreme system

	Which they themselves
	Could not grasp.


[4493]
,MANG DU MTHONG BA’I DRI MA BSAL PHYIR DANG,
,SKAL BZANG ‘GA’ LA ZAB LAM GSAL PHYIR DANG,
,BDAG KYANG SKYE BA KUN TU LAM GYI MCHOG
,’DI DANG MI ‘BRAL PHYIR DU ‘BAD PA BYAS,

	Thus it is that I myself
	Have undertaken great efforts

	To clear away the stain
	That I see here many have;

	And to bring a light
	To this profound path,
	For the sakes of just a few
	Who possess sufficient good.

	I hoped as well to assure
	That in all my lives to come
	I would never see myself
	Separated from this highest path.


[4494]
,DER NGAL BA LAS BYUNG BA’I DGE BA YIS,
,’GRO KUN ZAB MO’I GNAD RNAMS KUN RTOGS NAS,
,NYIN MTSAN KUN TU SGRUB PA LHUR LEN PA,
,RTAG TU SRAS BCAS RGYAL BA MNYES BYED SHOG

	And I pray that by
	The virtue I’ve created
	In these exhausting efforts,

	Every living being
	May come to a perfect
	Realization of every
	Crucial point of the profound.

	May they throw themselves
	Into their practice
	Always, night & day,

	And ever come to please
	The Victors and their children.
	

[4495]
,CES DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA’I RGYA CHER BSHAD PA DGONGS PA RAB GSAL ZHES BYA BA ‘DI NI, DGE BA’I BSHES GNYEN LHU LA DKA’ BCU PA LEGS PA DPAL GYIS DNGUL SRANG BZHI BCU’I MAndAL PHUL TE NAN CHER BSKUL BA DANG, 

This then is the Illumination of the True Thought, which was composed in response to urgent supplications by that spiritual friend, the Master of the Ten Classics from Hlula, by the name of Lekpa Pel—who at the same time presented a mandala offering complete with forty weights of silver.


[4496]
GZHAN YANG DGE BA’I BSHES GNYEN CHOS ‘DI LA SHIN TU MOS SHING, DON RTOGS PA’I BLO’I NUS PA MI DMAN PA MANG PO ZHIG GIS ‘GREL PA’I DKA’ GNAS RNAMS KYI BSHAD PA RNAMS TSANG BA, TSIG DON GSAL ZHING SPYI DON GYI MTHA’ GCOD PA RGYAS PA CIG GYIS SHIG CES NAN TAN GYIS BSKUL BA’I DON DU,

And there were as well others, great numbers of great spiritual friends, who had a great yearning for this teaching, and who had no little capacity of mind to grasp in full its meaning.  They urged me to the task, requesting explanations that would treat all the most difficult points in the autocommentary, in their entirety—clarifying the wording, presenting the overall meaning, and dissecting difficult points in full.  Thus have I written this work, to fulfil their insistent requests.


[4497]
DBU MA CHEN PO’I RNAL ‘BYOR PA MANG DU THOS PA’I DGE SLONG SHAR TZONG KHA PA BLO BZANG GRAGS PA’I DPAL GYIS, ‘BROG RI BO CHE DGE LDAN RNAM PAR RGYAL BA’I GLING DU SBYAR BA’O,,

This work was composed then by a deep practitioner of the magnificent middle way, a Buddhist monk by the name of the glorious Lobsang Drakpa, hailing from the east of our land, and deep in his learning.  He completed this work at the monastery known as Ganden, land of goodness, isle of the final victory, nestled below Shepherd’s Peak.





The Root Text of
“Entering the Middle Way”




Root Text of
Entering the Middle Way

This translation utilizes the edition from the Derge edition of the Tengyur, with original folio numbers noted.


	[title]
[f. 201b]
In the language of India, this book is called Madhyamaka
Avatara Nama.
In the language of Tibet, it is called Uma La Jukpa Shejawa.
In the English language, these translate as
“The Book known as Entering the Middle Way”


	[translators’ obeisance]
I bow down to glorious Gentle Voice, become young.



	Chapter 1
	Perfect Happiness

	[I.1]
The listeners, and the medium Buddhas,	
Are born from the Lords of the Able;
And Buddhas take their holy birth
From the bodhisattvas.

The causes which create
These children of the Victors
Are the attitude of compassion;
A state of mind beyond duality;
And the Wish for enlightenment.


	[I.2]
And so here at the beginning,
I shall sing the praises of compassion—

For I believe that love, and only love,
Is like the seed which produces
Those excellent crops of the Victors;

And like the water which makes them grow,
And like the ripened fruit
Which then long afterwards
Is something we can enjoy.


	[I.3]
First they want a person,
Talking about “me”;
And then they crave for things,
Talking about “mine.”

I bow down to that thing
Which is compassion for all beings—
Those who revolve here helplessly,
Like buckets on a water wheel.


[I.4-5a]
The one we call the “first” is the one
Where a child of the Victors sees every living creature
As constantly shifting, and empty
Of any nature of their own—
Like the moon reflected in shifting waters;

And where their heart becomes a slave
To thoughts of compassion,
Determined to free these beings;

Living in a place of joy,
Dedicating all they do
With the prayer of Perfect Goodness.


[I.5b]
Starting from this point,
They have attained it;
As such, they are referred to
With nothing less
Than the name of “bodhisattva.”


[I.6a]
They have also taken their birth
Into the family of Those Gone Thus,
And they have eliminated, within themselves,
All three of the bonds.


	[I.6b]
This bodhisattva holds in their hands
A supreme form of happiness;
And they are further someone
Who can shake a hundred planets.


[I.7]
They want to work their way up
From the one level to the next;
They begin to move up;

And when it happens
They block all the paths
To the realms of misery.

At this point as well
All the levels for them
Relating to normal beings
Are finished.

	They are spoken of this way
As a realized being of the eight.


[I.8a]
Even those who stay at the first
Of the visions of total enlightenment

Defeat, by the force of both good karmas,
[f. 202a] The self-made buddhas,

Along with those born from the words
Of the Lords of the Able Ones;

Then they continue to exceed them further.	


[I.8b]
This same one will also exceed them
In their state of mind,
At the level called “Gone Far.”


[I.9a]
At this point,
It is none other than giving,
The first of the causes
Of total enlightenment,
Which becomes higher for them.


[I.9b]
The fact that this person
Esteems even the act
Of giving away their own flesh

Acts too as a cause for the deduction
Of something not normally apparent.


[I.10]
All people here have a hope
For happiness;
And without things,
Human beings are not happy.

The Able Ones,
Understanding that things
Come from giving,
Thus speak of giving first.


[I.11]
Even people with little compassion,
Or those with a very cruel heart,
The ones who are only
Watching out for themselves,

Can still get the things they want
From giving, the cause which puts
Suffering to a final rest.


[I.12]
Because of these instances of giving then,
Even they at some point will quickly attain
Opportunities to meet people
Who are realized beings.

And then the flow
Of their lives of suffering
Will be stopped completely,

And those with this cause
Will come to peace.
					

[I.13a]
The giving of those
Who have resolved in their hearts
To be of benefit to living beings

Makes them feel happiness,
Not long afterwards.


	[I.13b]
And these are the reasons
Why it is none other 
Than the discussion of giving

Which is primary for both
Those who are the embodiment of love,
And those who are not this embodiment.


[I.14]
When a child of the Victors
Hears “Please give it to me,”
And thinks to themselves,

They feel a happiness
Which is even greater
Than the happiness
Of the Able Ones,
When they enter into peace.

What need then is there
To mention how they feel
When they give away everything?

				 
[I.15]
What do they do with the pain
Of cutting off & giving away
Their own flesh?

When they have seen for themselves
The pain of others—
Those in the hells & the rest—

They leap to do the deed,
In order to cut that pain.


	[I.16a]
Giving which is void
Of anything which is given;

And anyone who receives it;
And anyone who gives it

Is what we say
Is a “perfection beyond the world.”


	[I.16b]
When a person feels an attachment
To all the three of these,

This has been taught
As a “perfection of the world.”
	
			
	[I.17]
Thus does the happiness we have found
Rest, perfectly, within the mind
Of a child of the Victors;

Thus does its light, like a moonstone,
Lend great beauty to this ultimate setting;

Thus does it clear away and conquer
All the masses of darkness [f. 202b].


	[chapter number]
This concludes the first wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
	of Entering the Middle Way.



Chapter 2
Immaculate

[II.1a]
Their ethical way of life
Possesses both an excellence
And high qualities;

As such, they have rid themselves
Of the stench of immorality,
Even in their dreams.


[II.1b]
Since the movements
Of their body & speech & mind
Are pure,

They accumulate all ten
Of the ultimate karmic paths.


[II.2]
They possess these same
Ten paths of goodness
In a way which is even better,
Reaching extreme purity.

They are always pure,
Like the autumn moon,
Made lovely by both
Peacefulness and light.


[II.3]
If they were to view
Following an ethical way of life purely
As something that existed by nature,
Then their ethics would no longer be pure.

Thus it is that they are always free
Of their mind running in duality
Towards any of the three.


[II.4a]
When people who have practiced giving
Enjoy their wealth in a lower realm,

It’s because the legs of an ethical life
Have failed them.


	[II.4b]
When you splurge the accumulated capital
From which you are earning your interest,

You will having nothing more
That can bring you wealth later on.
			

	[II.5]
Suppose a person
Who is free to do whatever they want
In a land that suits all their needs
Cannot restrain themselves;

They will fall into the abyss,
Living under the will of others.

And then later
Who could ever get them out?


[II.6]
This is why the Victorious Ones,
When they had discussed the act of giving,
Then afterwards discussed none other than
Living an ethical way of life.

If high personal qualities flourish
In the garden of an ethical life,
The fruits of wealth
Will never be interrupted.


[II.7]
Other than an ethical way of life,
There is no cause
That can bring normal beings,

And those born of the holy words,
And those who have confirmed
Themselves in their enlightenment,
And the sons & daughters of the Victors

The achievement of definite good
And the higher realms of life.


[II.8]
A corpse cannot coexist
With the great ocean;

The auspicious cannot coexist
With something which is ill-starred.

Just so, someone who is a great being
By virtue of their ethical life

Would never want to associate
With someone who has failed
To follow this way of life.


[II.9]
An ethical way of life
Where you see them as three—

The one who gives them up,
The ones that they give up,
And the one towards whom
They give them up—

Is one that we call
A “perfection of the world.”

And it is beyond the world
Where this way of life is empty
Of attachment to these three.
	
				
[II.10]
The light that comes from the moon
Of this child of the Victorious Ones
Is the glory of the cycle of pain,

Without being the cycle of pain—
It is immaculate, free of every stain [f. 203a].

Like the light of the moon
In the days of autumn,
It banishes the painful heat
In the minds of living beings.
	

	[chapter number]
This concludes the second wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
	of Entering the Middle Way.



Chapter 3
Shining

	[III.1]
This third of the bodhisattva levels
Is called “Shining,”

Because of the light given off
By the fire that burns
Every stick of the firewood
Of all the things you can know.

At this point, a light
Of a copper color, like that of the sun,
Shines forth from the child
Of Those Who Have Gone to Bliss.


	[III.2]
Suppose some
Find their thoughts disturbed,
Not a place to go,

And they cut pound after pound
Of flesh from their body,

Along with the bone,
And for a very long time.

Even then they find
Even more powerful feelings of patience
Towards the one who is cutting
Their flesh.

				
	[III.3]
The bodhisattva, who has seen
That nothing is itself,
Also sees that these things—

What is being cut,
Who is doing the cutting,
And how they are cutting
At that moment—

Are all like a reflection in a mirror,
And for this as well
Maintain their patience.


[III.4]
Do you think that—
If a person hurts you,
And you feel enmity towards them—

Then this enmity will somehow
Prevent what’s done & gone?

We can conclude then
That feeling enmity now
Over what they did
Is without question pointless.

It also contradicts the world beyond.
	
				
[III.5]
You claim you’d like to finish off
The consequences of a negative deed
You’ve done in the past—well there it is.

Hurting the other person back,
And anger towards them,

Are precisely the karmic seed
That will bring the pain back—
How then could they be right?


	[III.6]
A moment of anger
Towards bodhisattvas

Is enough to destroy
The good karma accumulated

Over the length of a hundred eons
Through giving and an ethical life;

Thus there exists no negative deed
Which is more effective
Than losing ones patience.


	[III.7a]
Losing your patience makes your appearance unattractive,
And leads you to do things which are low.

It robs you of your capacity to distinguish
Between what is right to do, and what is not;

And it quickly throws you down
Into the lower realms.
			
	
	[III.7b-8]
		Patience brings us good qualities—the opposite
		Of what we have described so far.

		It makes us attractive in our appearance,
And we become valued & cherished

To beings who are holy.  We become well versed
In what is proper to do, and what
Is not proper to do; after that happens

We take our birth among
The worldly gods or humans;
And bad deeds done are ended.
				

	[III.9]
Common beings and children of the Victors
Should come to understand

The problems of anger
And the good qualities of patience [f. 203b].

Stop ever losing your patience,
And quickly come to rely upon,

In every situation, that patience commended
By those who are realized beings.


	[III.10]
The one where we still perceive the three
Is the one which is still of the world,
Even if it happens to be dedicated
To the enlightenment of a total Buddha.

But the one where we perceive none of them
Is the only one that the Buddhas
Have described as “That perfection
Which is beyond the world.”


[III.11]
Children of the Victors at this level
Achieve concentration and clairvoyance.

They have finished off	
Ignorant liking & disliking;

And they’re always able as well
To destroy the mistaken wanting

For the objects of desire
That those of the world possess.


[III.12]
The three practices of giving & the rest
Are recommended by Those Who’ve Gone to Bliss
Primarily for those who live the home life.

What we call the “accumulation of merit”
Is these same three; this is the cause for the holy body
Of a Buddha which is physical in nature.


[III.13]
These children of the Victors,
Standing in the Sun of Shining,

Banish the darkness within their being
Even at the first; then gain a fervent desire
To destroy the darkness of beings;

And despite their cutting light,
They never lose their temper.


	[chapter number]
This concludes the third wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
 	of Entering the Middle Way.



Chapter 4
Radiance

[IV.1]
All high qualities follow after joyful effort;
It is the cause for both the accumulation
Of goodness and of knowledge.

The level at which joyful effort blazes
Is the fourth, to which we give
The name of “Radiance.”


	[IV.2a]
Here the children of Those Gone to Bliss
Practice the qualities of perfect enlightenment
Even higher; and then a light arises from this—

An exceeding light is born,
A light of a copper color.


[IV.2b]
		And then everything related
		To seeing things as themselves
		Is finished off completely.


	[chapter number]
	This concludes the fourth wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
		of Entering the Middle Way.



Chapter 5
Invincible

[V.1a]
		These great beings cannot be defeated,
		Even by each & every demon;

		And so the level is known
		As “Invincible.”
					

[V.1b]
		They reach a high point
		In their practice of meditation,
		As well as an excellent mind:

		And a high degree of mastery
		In a very fine state of mind
		Comprehending the nature
		Of the truths.
				

	[chapter number]
This concludes the fifth wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
 	of Entering the Middle Way.



Chapter 6
Direct Perception

	[VI.1]
A bodhisattva at the level of Direct Perception [f. 204a]
Is residing in an exceptional state of meditation.

They are directly approaching the qualities
Of a totally enlightened being,
And they have seen this one suchness:
Of how all things in the world occur.

They reside in wisdom, and have thus attained
The ending of certain undesirable qualities.
	
		
	[VI.2]
Think of how a single person with sight
Can easily lead an entire group of blind people
To a place where they would like to go.

Just so, here our intelligence
Takes up the fine qualities we possess—
Those with imperfect eyes—

And they travel to that one state
Of becoming a Victor.	


	[VI.3]
I shall now impart to you the manner
Of the true nature of things,

Following the scriptural tradition
Of the realized being Nagarjuna:

Realizing that thing infinitely profound
In just that way, utilizing the scriptures
And, beyond them, reasoning.


	[VI.4-5a]
There are certain individuals who—
Even as common beings—
Feel repeated sensations of overwhelming joy
When they hear of emptiness.

This joy brings tears to their eyes,
And they get goosebumps.

These kinds of people have the seeds
For the mind of a fully enlightened Buddha.

These people then are proper vessels
To whom you can teach emptiness;
These are the ones to whom you should teach
The reality which is ultimate.


	[VI.5b-7a]
		And they will achieve good qualities
		Which follow upon this:

They forever continue to
Observe a pure code of ethics;

		They make efforts in the act of giving;
		They dedicate themselves to great compassion;
		And they adhere to the practice of patience.

		They take all these good deeds
		And dedicate them to reaching enlightenment,
		So that they can free all living beings.

		Those who have reached total enlightenment
		Pay high respect to these bodhisattvas.


	[VI.7b]
An individual who is well versed
In both the profound & the widespread

Will, in time, attain the level
Of Perfect Happiness.

Lend then your ears to this path,
Those who aspire to reach it.
			
	
	[VI.8a]
This cannot occur through that—
And how could it occur
Through something other?

Nor could it through both.
How as well could it occur
Without a cause at all?


[VI.8b]
There would be no additional
Point at all served to this,
If it were to occur through that.


[VI.8c-VI.9a]
		If something had already grown,
		It would as well be totally illogical
		For it to grow once more.

		And suppose you fantasize
		That something already grown
		Could ever grow again;

		It would then be the case
That we could never observe
		Sprouts & such growing here.
				

[VI.9b]
The seed could only
Continue to grow,

Until the very end
Of the universe.


[VI.9c]
How could the presence
Of the one ever act [f. 204b]
To destroy the other?


	[VI.10a]
		According to you, the sprout
		Could have no shape, or color,
		Or taste or properties,

		Or ripening that was different
		From that of the seed
		Which had given it birth.


	[VI.10b]
Suppose the self-nature
In the previous one fades away,

And transforms into
The essence of the other—

And at that point,
Its is that very one.

But how could that be?


	[VI.11]
		Suppose that, as you put it,
		The seed & the sprout here
		Were not not the other.

		Then just as the seed,
		Neither could the sprout
		Be something that we held.

		Or else we could also say that,
		Since these two are the same,
		Then just as the sprout
Is something that is held,

The other too would have to be—
And so we refuse to accept this idea.			
	

	[VI.12a]
		Not even in the everyday world
		Would people accept the idea
		That they were one & the same.

		This is because,
		Even if the cause ends,
		Its result can still be observed.


[VI.12b]
		Thus it is that
		The fanciful idea
		That objects grow from themselves

		Is illogical, both in the way
		Things are, and in
		The everyday world as well.


[VI.13]
		If we accept that a thing
		Could grow from itself,
		It would be the case that

		The thing being produced;
		And the thing doing the producing;
		The very act; and the agent
		Would have to be one & the same.
	
		They are though not the same;
		And so the idea that something
		Could grow from itself
		Is not something that we
		Should ever accept.

		After all, the problems
		Described at length
		Would then result.


[VI.14]
		Suppose it were the case
		That something other
		Could grow, based on
		Something other;

		Well then we would get
		A thick darkness
		Even from flames.
	
		And all objects
		Would have to grow
		From all other objects;

		For the reason that
		Each & every thing
		That did not act
		To produce the thing

		Would be exactly the same,
		In being different.
	

[VI.15]
		Now suppose someone says
		“We specify anything
		Which can be created,
		As such, as the result.

		And anything which is
		Capable of producing
		Is a cause, even if
		It is something other.

		A rice sprout grows
		From what is incorporated
		Into a single flow,

		And from something
		That does function
		To produce it.

		As such, it is not something
		That can grow, in the same way,
		From barley or the like.”			


[VI.16]
		Take barley; and filaments;
		The flame of the forest;
		Or anything of the like.
	
These are not at all things
That we could ever agree
Act to produce a rice sprout,
Nor do they possess the capacity;

They are not included in a single flow,
Nor are they the same.

Just so, neither is the rice seed
For it; because it is entirely other.


[VI.17]
		It is not the case
		That the sprout and seed
		Exist at the same time;
	
		If they cannot be
		Totally other,
		Then how could the seed
		Be something entirely other?

		Neither, therefore,
		Is it the case
		That the birth of a sprout
		From a seed could be [f. 205a].

		As such, we implore you
		To relinquish this position,
		Where you claim that things
		Grow from something other.			


	[VI.18]
Now the others may claim:
“We can observe
How the arms of a scale
Rising & descending,

These two, are not such
That they do not occur
At the same time.

The growth & the ending
Of what is produced,
And what does the producing,
Occur too in a similar way.”

This idea though is not correct;
Even given that these two
Are concurrent,
There would not be here
Simultaneity.				


[VI.19]
		Suppose that,
		In the act of growing,
		It is still approaching growth;
		And as such it is not
		Something that exists.

		There is though that
		Which is in the act of ending;
		But we treat it as something
		Approaching its destruction.

		How then in this moment
		Could it be that these
		Were the same as the scale?

		If the agent were absent,
		Then for this growing to exist
		Would be contrary
		To the very concept of logic.


	[VI.20]
Suppose the eye and such
Which are what produce
And are simultaneous to
The awareness of the eye;

As well as the discrimination
And the like which occur
In conjunction,

Are—relative to it—
Perfectly other.

What purpose
Could possibly be served
By the occurrence of something
That already existed?

Suppose you say
That there is none;
We have already described
The problem with that case.				


[VI.21]
		Suppose something produces
		Something produced;
		And what it produces
		Is something other.

		Let’s calculate whether
		That exists; or else does not;
		Or both; or is devoid of either.

		Suppose it existed;
		Then what need would there be
		For what acted to produce it?

		And if on the other hand
		It did not exist,
		Then what would it do for it?

		If both, what would it do?
		And if it were devoid,
		What again could it do?


[VI.22]
		Those who remain
		With their own viewpoints
		Consider the world accurate;

		What could possibly be here
		The use of articulating
The point with this logic?

		What people of the world
		Perceive is that things issue
		From things which are
Other than them.

What purpose would
The logic for this be—
For the fact that things do grow
From things that are other?


[VI.23]
All objects involve
Two different natures:
Objects discovered
By seeing what is pure
And what is a lie.

It was declared that the one
Which serves as the object
When we see the pure
Is suchness;

And that seen to be a lie
Is deceptive reality.


[VI.24]
We take the position
That those which see the lie
Are also of two types:

Where the powers are clear,
And where the powers
Are defective.

We take the position
That states of mind
Belonging to those
With powers
Possessing a defect,

Relative to states of mind
With powers which are sound,
Are mistaken.	


[VI.25]
		Things which are held
		By the six senses where they

		Are not adversely affected
		Are those perceived
		By the everyday world;
 
		Relative to the world itself,
		These are real—the rest
		Are established as mistaken,
		Even just to the world [f. 205b].


	[VI.26]
The nature of the self—
As it is imagined
By those of lower views,

Inspired by the sleep
Of misunderstanding;

And those things imputed
In illusions, mirages, & the like,

Are nothing that
Could ever exist,
Even relative to the world.


[VI.27]
The perceptions of eyes
Clouded with cataracts

Cannot draw into question
A state of mind
Without such cataracts;

And there is nothing about
A mind which has abandoned
The wisdom free of stain

Which could ever draw
Into question the state of mind
Which is free of stain—

These two cases then
Are the same.


[VI.28]
Dark ignorance draws a veil
Over the nature of things,
And from that fact is deception.

		Due to this, things
		That are a false construct
		Appear as though
		They were real.

		These were described
		By the Able One to be
		A deceptive reality:

		Objects which make up
		This false construct
		To the deceptive.


	[VI.29]
	Suppose that a person,
	Due to some cataracts,
	Thinks they see something
	As different than it really is:

	They perceive a strand
	Of hair, or something of the like.

	And now suppose a person
	With clear eyes looks down
	Where those actual things
	Are supposed to be.
	
	They are the one
	Who sees the real;

	Understand the case here
	As being the same.


	[VI.30]
Suppose that people
Of the world were accurate;

These people of the world then
Would have to see the real nature.

If that were so,
Then there would be no need
For other realized beings.

And what use then
Would be served by
The path of the realized?

Neither do these simple fools
Enjoy any accurate perception
At all.


[VI.31a]
Those of the world
Are not, in any way,
An accurate perception.

For this reason,
The world cannot draw
Anything into question,

With regard to
The way things are.


[VI.31b]
Suppose that
The state of things
In the everyday world

Were itself disallowed
By the very conventions
Of this same world;

This same person
Would be contradicted
By the world.


[VI.32]
		Because the world
		Makes the declaration,

		“I was the one who
		Gave birth to this child,”

		And people think
		To themselves,
		“I planted the tree,”
		
		Things growing from things
That are other than them

Is not something that we see
Even in the everyday world.


[VI.33]
And for what reason?
A sprout is not something
Which exists as something
Other than the seed;

Therefore, by the time
Of the sprout, the seed
Has gone out of existence;
That no longer exists.

For the reason that
They are not such
That they exist
As one single thing,

Because it’s not,
We never speak of a seed
Which is present,
By the time of the sprout.


[VI.34]
Suppose they existed
By definition; if that
Were something depending,
In a manner discounting these,

Entities would have to be
Destroyed; and as such,

Emptiness must act
As a cause
For the destruction
Of the entities.

Yet neither is that
Reasonable; as such,

It could never occur
That objects could exist.


[VI.35]
In a selected case,
We might make an examination
Of these things, and then

We might not be able
To discover whether

Entities involved with suchness
Existed, in their nature,
Towards us.

As such,
In the nominal reality 
Of the everyday world,

No one undertakes
Those kinds of examination.


[VI.36]
Use the same rationale
As at the point of
	The way things are:

	That it would be illogical [f. 206a]
	To say that a thing
	Could have grown

	Either from itself,
	Or from something different.

	This very same reasoning
	Applies in nominal cases
	As well, to show that
	It could not be logical.

	What kind can you point to,
	For the growing?


[VI.37]
		Things which are empty—
		A reflection in a mirror,
		And so on—
	
		Rely upon the coming together;
		And we cannot say
		This is something
		The world itself wouldn’t say.

		It’s just the same
		As there: a reflection
		And the like are empty,

		And from these grow
		Awareness which assumes
		The likeness of it.


[VI.38a]
		All functioning things—
		Even though they are empty—

		Quite certainly grow,
Just as these, from those
Of emptiness.


	[VI.38b]
These things
Neither last forever
Nor simply discontinue.


[VI.39]
	For this reason,
	Neither does it stop
	Through any nature
	Of its own.

	As such, it has
The power for this,
Even refusing
A foundation consciousness.

In particular ones,
Karma can stop,
And a very long time
Can pass; but even then,

You should understand,
The exact consequence
Will be given forth.


[VI.40]
		One may see certain objects
		Perceived inside a dream;

		And then foolish people
		Might awake,
		And begin to feel desire.

		Just so,
		A karma which is not
		Something that exists
		With any nature of its own

		Can stop,	
		And there can be
		A consequence from it.


[VI.41]
		It’s also like objects
		Equivalent in the way
		They’re not really there;

		Those with cataracts
		Are sure they see
		Strands of hair,

		But other things
		That we don’t even see.

		Similarly,
		You should understand
		That it’s not as if
		What has ripened
		Will ripen once again.
		

[VI.42]
		As such, we can see
		That a non-virtuous ripening
		Is black karma,

		While that virtuous ripening
		Is from a good deed.

		And also intelligent ones
		Who understand
		There exists no virtue
		Nor non-virtue
		Come to be freed.

		And they undertake
		To prevent overthinking
		Karma & its consequences.


[VI.43]
	Statements as thus—
That there does exist
	One of the foundation,

	And there does exist
	A very essence of the person

	Which is only
	In and of these parts
	To the person—

	Were for those particular
	Ones who could not comprehend
	Extraordinarily deep points.


[VI.44]
	It’s like how
The Buddha is free
	From the view
	Of the destructible collection,

	But did still give teachings
	Using “me” and “mine.”

	This is a similar case:
	Things admittedly have
No nature of their own,

And yet only
In a figurative sense
It was stated
That things did exist.


[VI.45]
	They see there are no
	Objects of perception;

	And they see none
	Which act to hold
	To these—

		They come to a deep
		Realization that all three
		Realms of existence
		Are only consciousness itself.

		A bodhisattva who
		Is staying in wisdom
		Comes to a realization

		Of that real nature of things:
		That they are only consciousness.
		

[VI.46]
	It’s like the great ocean,
	Instigated by the winds [206b];

	And from there
	The waves occur.

	Just so do we have
	What we call
	“The all-foundation”

	For the deep seeds
	Of everything;

	And from that arise
	What is nothing more
	Than consciousness,

	Through energies
	Concordant with them.


[VI.47a]
	Therefore an essential nature
	To dominated things
	
	Is the cause for things
	Which exist only as
	They are given these names.


[VI.47b]
	They occur in a lack
	Of outer objects
	Which are grasped;
	
	And they exist,
	And have a nature,

	Never objects of
Any elaboration.


[VI.48]
		Where then is
		The metaphor for
		A mind where there
		Are no outer objects?

		Suppose you say
		It is the same
		As a dream—
		We need to consider this.

		Suppose that—
		Even just in a dream—
		There’s a mind;

		In ours there is
		No such existence:
		You would have no
		Metaphor that existed.


[VI.49]
	Suppose that,
	When we wake,
	We remember the dream;
	And our mind existed.

	From that then
	Outside objects
	Would be just so.

	It follows from this—
	The memory where
	You think to yourself,
	“I saw something”;

	And moreover
	Such things existed
	As outside.


[VI.50]
		If, in our sleep,
		The mind of vision
		Is impossible,

		Then those are not
		Something; rather,
		All that is present is
		The awareness of our thoughts.

		We are attached to
		An aspect of it;
		The outside world itself.

		Suppose you accept that
		It’s just the same here
		As the way in a dream.


[VI.51]
		Just the way you say
		Outside objects never start
		In a dream,

		The thought too,
		In the same manner,
		Never starts.

		The eye and
		The object of the eye,
		And the state of mind
		Triggered by them—

		All three—
Are also deceptive.		


[VI.52a]
	The extra three
	For the ear and so on
	Also have no growing.


	[VI.52b]
	Just as in a dream,
	Here in waking too
	Entities are deceptive.

	As such, this mind
	Is nothing that exists.

	None of the objects
	Of activity
	Have any existence;

	And neither do
	The powers exist.


[VI.53]
		It’s just as here,
		When we’re awake.

		And it’s the same
		For those who have
		Not yet woken;

		For that length of time,
		All three exist to them.

		When they have awakened,
		None of the three
		Exist any more.

		Just so, we can
		Finish the sleep
		Of dark ignorance;
		Such is it.


[VI.54]
	A power which has 
Cataracts, a particular
State of mind,

Sees certain strands
		Due to the influence
		Of the cataracts.

		Relative to this mind,
		Both of them are real.

		To one seeing objects clearly,
		Both are false.


[VI.55]
		Suppose a state of mind
		Were there in the absence
		Of an existing object;

		The object of that strand
		Would have an eye which
		Was connected with it;

		And one who had
		No cataracts would also
		Have a state of mind
		With a strand of hair—

		And for this reason
		It is not the case;
		It is not something
		Which could exist.


[VI.56a]
		Suppose this were
Your position:

“It is not the case
		That there would be
		Any ripening
		
		Of the potential
		For a state of mind
		With those who saw.

		For this reason then,
		It is not the case
		That a state of mind could
		Ever come with these

		Because it was devoid
		Of any entity
		Which possessed
		An existing object.”


	[VI.56b]
	Since there is no such thing
	As a potential like this
	Which exists [f. 207a],

	That is not something
	Which could be established.


	[VI.57a]
	It is not a possibility
	That there could exist
	A potential to what
	Had already grown;

	Neither could there exist
	Any potential that had
	A nature of
Not having yet grown.


	[VI.57b]
	There would exist none
	Characterized by
	A certain feature,

	In the absence of
	A feature.

	This would also
	Have to exist
	With the child
	Of a barren woman.


[VI.58]
		Suppose you assert
		That you apply a term
		To that which is
		Yet to come.

		But there cannot exist
		Any which could arise
		In the absence
		Of a potential.

These are things
Which occur in a
Codependent relationship;

The holy ones
Would say that
That is something
Which could only never exist.


[VI.59]
	Suppose that
	Some potential
	From the stopping
	Ripens, and from that
	There comes this.

	Something other
	Is arising from
	A potential which
	Is something other.

	In a case where
	Things have the flow
	There exist those
	Distinct from one another;

	In that case
	Everything would happen
	From everything.


[VI.60]
	Suppose then
	There is the composite
	Flow of those
	That are different
	From each other.

	But suppose you say
	That the flow for those
	Could never involve
	Separate things;

	And so there is
	No such problem.

	This idea though
	Is something that
	You would still
	Have to prove.

	It is illogical to say
	That there could be
	Any opportunity

	For a flow of things
	That were not separate.	


[VI.61]
	John is leaning on Joe;
	Still, they are entities
	That are essentially different;
	
As such, they are not
Sharing a single flow.

For those that were
Separate things that
Existed by definition,

It would not be logical
That they were sharing
A single flow.


[VI.62]
The growing of
Awareness of the eye
Springs forth from
That potential which
Occurs just after that.

And its consciousness
Is the support for a potential;

They think of this and say,
“This is the eye,
A physical sense power.”


[VI.63]
		Here awareness
		That arises from
		The sense powers

		Comes from
		Seeds for it
		In the absence
		Of outer objects.

		Beings though fail
		To understand that
		What arises is just

		The appearance
		Of blue and the like,
			
		Believing that
		What is mind 
		Constitutes outer
		Objects of perception.


[VI.64]
		In a dream,
		There are no physical objects
		Which are other entities.

		The potential for them ripens,
		And from that arises
		A state of mind
		With the aspects of those.

		In this very same way,
		Here when we are awake
		As well, there are none outer;
		What we have is the thought.

		Suppose you take this position.
		

[VI.65]
		In a dream,
		A state of mind
		Comes up which is
		The thought,
	
		And takes on
		An aspect of blue
		Or whatever it may be,

		Even though
		There is no sense power
		Of the eye there.

		A deep seed
		Within it ripens;

		In this case,
		Why wouldn’t a person
		Who was blind
		Come to see?


[VI.66]
		Suppose that,
		As you would have it,

		There does exist the
		Ripening of the potential
		For the sixth
		Within a dream;

		And suppose that
		This were absent
		During the waking state.

		Why then wouldn’t it be
		Correct to say that

		Here there was no ripening of
		The potential for the sixth,

		And just so no such thing
		During the dream?


[VI.67]
		As they do when
		There is no eye,
		For this they are not
		Acting as a cause.

		Just so, in a
		Dream as well,
		Sleep could not be
		The cause [f. 207b].

		For that reason,
		You would accept
That in a dream
As well as that,

There were
False entities
Having objects

As the cause
For the perception
Of the eye.


[VI.68a]
		Whatever response it is
		That these might make,
		We can see that this
		Assertion is equivalent.

		As such,
		This particular argument
		Actually clears the beliefs.


	[VI.68b]
	The Buddhas have not
	Ever taught the idea,

	In any at all, that
	Entities could exist.


[VI.69]
		There is that case
		Where high practitioners
		Follow the advice
		Of their spiritual teachers,
		
		And see the entire
		Surface of the earth
		Covered with skeletons.

		There also they see,
		In the absence
Of all three arising.

And that’s because
It has been described
As a mistaken
Bringing to the mind.
		

[VI.70]
		Suppose you have
		Objects of the awareness
		Of a sense power,
		And the same
		For all of them.

		Just so,
For certain others
There should also
Be a perception,
A mind of the repulsive,

When they direct
Their minds towards
The same objects:
The perception 
Should also occur.

Neither would this
Be deceptive.


[VI.71a]
	For cases equivalent
To a state of mind 
With a sense power
That has cataracts,

There is also
The state of mind
Of pus for those
Craving spirits

Towards a stream
Of fresh water.


[VI.71b]
	To summarize,
	There is nothing
	In the universe;

	Just so, there is
	No state of mind.

	This is the point
	We need to understand.


[VI.72]
		Suppose that there exist
		No objects to be held,
		Devoid then of any
		Holding itself;

		And that there
		Could exist
		Dominated entities
		That were empty
		Of the two.

		How is it then
		That you can perceive
		The existence of these?

		It would be wrong
To say there did exist
Something there,
Even though it wasn’t held.


[VI.73a]
		This particular one
		Is not something
		That could establish these,
		By experiencing them.


[VI.73b]
		Suppose we were
		To establish it
		From recollection
		At a later time.

		They are
		Bringing it up
		In order to substantiate
		
		That which has not yet
		Been established.

		The fact that this
		Does not exist
		Is not something
		Which serves to establish it.


[VI.74]
	In the end, your proofs
	Are going to rely upon
	It knowing itself;

	But it is still
	Not logical
	For recollection
	To recall,

	Because they are
	Other than each other.

	It’s the same as
	What could have arisen
	In the mindstream of one
	Who has not known;

	That logical statement
	Would also obviate details.


[VI.75]
		First of all, in ours
		That recollection of
		Of having undergone
		An experience

		Could never be
		Something other.

		For this reason,
		It will happen
		That there will be
		A recollection

		Where we say to ourselves,
		“I have seen this.”

This too is the way
Of the world;
The way that the world
Speaks of things.


[VI.76]
		Therefore, apperception
		Is something that
		Doesn’t exist;

		What is it then
		That holds to your
		Dominated entities?

		The agent,
		The object of the action,
		And the act
		Are not one & the same.

		As such,
		It would be inappropriate
		To say that this
		Were doing the holding.


[VI.77]
		Suppose that
		There is nothing
		Which can start,

		And that
		There does exist
		An entity which is
		A dominated one
	
		And has a nature
		Such that it is
		Not perceived.

		There is yet
		Another why
		It would be illogical
		To say that such existed [f. 208a]:

		The child of a
		Barren woman
		Has done so much damage.


[VI.78]
	At such point
That there did not exist
Even the slightest
Dominated entities,

Then how could
Something ever exist
As a deceptive reason?

If it accords to
These other ones,
Attached to thinking
Of that substance,

Then the way that
The everyday world
Posits how things exist
Is completely lost.


[VI.79]
		Those who have
		Wandered away
		From the path of
		Our master, Nagarjuna,

		Lack the method
		Needed to attain peace.

		These people have lost
		The true concepts
		Of deceptive reality
		And the reality
		Of suchness.

		Once we have lost this,
		There is no possibility
		That we can achieve freedom.


[VI.80]
		There is nominal reality,
		Which becomes a method,
		And ultimate reality,
		Which comes from the method.

		Any person who fails
		To understand the divisions
		Of these two has entered
		Into a mistaken path,
		Of mistaken ideas.


[VI.81]
	You say that
	Dominated entities
	Are real;

	And then when
	You agree to it,
	
	A deceptive reality
	Is not something
	We can accept.

		It is meant
		For a particular effect—

		That all these things
		Are not things
		Which exist.

		Nonetheless,
		What we say is
		That they exist,

		To the appearances
		Of the world.


[VI.82]
	None exists
	For those who reside
	In peace, where
	
	Enemy destroyers
	Have eliminated
	The heaps.

	Suppose that,
	In a similar way,

	There were none
	In the general
	World as well.

	I do not say that
	It would be similar;	

	That there could exist
	One like this
	For the world.


[VI.83]
		If the world
		Is not something
		That could call your
		Ideas into question,

		Then you can
		Go ahead and deny it
		Relative to
		The world itself.

		You and the world
Can go ahead
And argue with
Each other on this.

Once you are done,
I will put my support
Behind the stronger.


[VI.84]
		A bodhisattva
		Headed towards
		The manifestation

		Comes to the realization
		That these three
		Worlds of pain
		Are nothing but the mind.

		What this means
		For them is that
		They have blocked
		
The idea of an
		Unchanging self
		As the creator,

		And come to
		The realization.


[VI.85]
		Thus it is
		The Journey to Langka
		Speaks of the diamond weapon

		Consisting of speech
		Used by the Omniscient One
		To smash down
		The lofty summit
		
		Of the mountain
		Of the River Schools.

		This is the one
		Described in order
		To carve out
		The real intent.	


[VI.86]
		Look at the way
		The River Schools—

		In this or that
		Of the commentaries
		Of theirs—

		Speak of the person
		And such and such.

		The Victors though
		Do not see these
		As creators,

		And so have stated
		That it is only the mind
		Which is the creator.		


[VI.87]
	We refer to those
	Who have expanded
	Their mind
	Into suchness
	As “Buddhas.”

	In the same way,
	It is “mind only”
	In the sense of 
	The main thing.

	This is from
	References in sutra
	Which say that

	“For the world,
	There is only mind [f. 208b].”

	Here it is not the
	Meaning of sutra to be
	Some kind of denial
	Of outer form.


[VI.88]
		Suppose all these
		Were referred to
		As “only the mind,”

		And the Buddha
		Knew this, and so
		Meant in this
To deny “form itself.”

And then how
Could it be in it
For the Great Being
To state that the mind

Was born from
Dark ignorance
And karma?


[VI.89]
	This one thing,
	The mind,

	Has set forth
		The world
		Of living beings,

		And the vessel
		Of the outer world,
		With all its
		Endless variation.

		It was stated that
All the beings there are
Have been created by karma;

If we were to eliminate
The mind, then there
Would no longer be
Any karma either.	


[VI.90]
		We would
		Have to admit
		That physical matter
		Does exist;

		It is not the case
		That with this
		You find the
		One creator,

		As in the case
		Of the mind.
		
		As such, we reject
		Any creator other than
		The mind itself;

		But that is not denying
		Outer form itself.


[VI.91]
		All five do exist,
Just as they are
Spoken of in
		The everyday world:

		That part
		Can be found
		In the way things are,
		According to the world.

		In a case where
		We accept that
		There can appear
		That wisdom
		Of suchness,

		These five
		Do not occur
		For a deep practitioner.


[VI.92a]
		If there exists
		No form,
		Then you shouldn’t
		Hold that mind
		Exists either.

		And if
		Mind exists,
		You shouldn’t
Be holding that
There exists no form.


[VI.92b]
		In sutras
		On the ways
		Of wisdom,

		The Buddha
		Treated them
		As equivalent,
		In rejecting.

		He also stated this
		In the teachings
		Of higher knowledge.


[VI.93]
		Even though
These stages
		Of the two realities
		Are destroyed,

		That doesn’t mean
		That your idea
		Of the substantial
		Is established;
		For it was disproved.

		Thus it is that,
		Because of stages
		Like that,
		
		Entities have
		Never arisen,
		For all the time
		There ever was.

		It is reasonable
		To say,
		In the world,
		That they have arisen.


[VI.94]
There is that sutra
Which states that
The appearance
Of the outside
Is nothing that exists.

What this is saying
Is that the mind
Appears in a
Variety of ways.

There are those
With an extreme
Attraction to forms;

And so they put
A stop to forms
For these individuals—

And those were only intended
As something metaphorical.


[VI.95a]
	This statement was made
	By the Teacher only
	As something to be
	Taken figuratively;

	It can also be established
	That it was only meant
	As metaphorical,
	And nothing more—
	
	Through logical reasoning.


	[VI.95b]
	There are
Citations from
	The body of sutras
	Like those;

	But there are
	Even more citations

	Which these quotations
	Explain to be taken
	Metaphorically.


[VI.96]
		The Buddhas
		Have stated that
		If no objects exist,

		And then we
Clear away
The idea of a
State of mind,

		Then people can
		Come to this idea
		More easily.

		If there are no
		Objects of knowledge,

		We can deny
		Any perception,
		And establish that.

		Therefore
		At the beginning
		We focus on denying
		Objects of knowledge.


[VI.97]
		That is, we should
		Come to know
		The whole story
		Of the scriptures.

		There are certain sutras
		Which contain ideas
		That explain something
		Other than suchness.

		They were taught
		In a figurative way;
		We should realize that,
		And interpret them [f. 209a].

		And any which conveys
		The idea of emptiness
		Should be understood
		As something
		To be taken literally.


[VI.98]
		It is also not the nature
		Of clear thinking
		To say that things
		Could arise from
		A combination.

		Why is that?
		Because those same
		Problems already raised
		Would strike
		Like lightning.

		From the point
		Of the everyday world
		There are none;

		And speaking as well
		From the point of view
		Of suchness,

		Neither is this idea
		Something that
		We can accept.

		The reason
		That this is true
		Is that there
		Is no such thing

		As an arising
		Accomplished separately.


[VI.99]
		Suppose then
		That it were the case
		That arising were
		Something that happened
		
		Only without
		A cause at all.

		In that case,
		Then all there is
		Would also have to
Simply pop up.

People of the
Everyday world,
Hoping that results
Will make their appearance,

Expend hundreds
Of efforts to accumulate
The seeds and so forth;

All this would
Never go on.


[VI.100]
		Suppose that the variety
		Of living beings
		Was simply devoid
		Of any cause.

		In this case,
		They would all become
		Something totally ineffable,

		Like the scent and color
		Of a blue lotus
		That suddenly popped
		Out in thin air.

		And then it would be
		The same with this
		Entire world that
		We hold before us,
		With all its endless variety.

		As such, you must
Understand that the world
Before us is the same
As our mind,

And something
From its own causes.	


[VI.101]
		It is only constructs
		Of these elements
		Which can serve as
		The object of your mind.

		And if things
		Were not such constructs,

		Then how on earth
		Could that which is
The thick darkness
		Of your mind itself

		Ever come to grasp,
		In a correct way,
		A world beyond
		This one?


[VI.102]
		When you good fellows
		Undertake to deny
		The existence of a world
		Beyond this one,

		You are looking
		At the nature
		Of existing things

		In a way which is
		Completely mistaken.

		This is equivalent
		To a basis for that view:

		A body which is
		A basis for that
		To be possessed.

		It is similar to
That point at which
You take a position

Where you accept
The very existence
Of embodiments
Of the elements.


[VI.103]
We have long since
Explained how it is
That these elements
Cannot be something
Which exists.

And how was it?
We undertook to deny,
Previously, that things
Could grow from themselves;

From some other;
From both; or without
Any cause at all.

We have already denied
The idea in common.
Much less with these elements,

This is not something
Where we have given
No explanation.


[VI.104a]
		For the reason
		That there can exist
		No arising of a thing
		Which could occur
		From itself,

		Or from something other,
		Or from both,
		Or without relying
		Upon any cause at all,

		Entities are devoid
		Of some nature
		Of their own.


[VI.104b]
		The fact is that
		The everyday world
		Exists in a dense
		Lack of understanding

		Which is just the same
		As a huge gathering
		Of rain clouds.

		And for that reason, they have
		A mistaken impression
		Of the objects around them;

		This is how things make
		Their appearance to them.


[VI.105]
It’s possible
For some people,
By force of a cataract,

To be made to hold,
Mistakenly,

A strand of hair,
One moon as two,
The pattern
Of a peacock’s feathers,

A random fly, or
Something of the like [f. 209b].

The same sort of thing
Happens with those
Who are not wise,

Due to the problem
Of their dark ignorance.

They perceive
Various objects
Like produced things
With their intellect.


[VI.106]
		This description
		Is without doubt
		A reference to the fact

		That it is only those
		Who are not wise
		Who understand all this

		As saying that karma
		Occurs dependent upon
		Dark ignorance;

		And without
		This dark ignorance, then
		That would not occur.

		The wise grasp
		That these are
		Perfectly empty,

		Using the bright sun
		Of their fine minds
		To dispel—completely—
		That thick fog;
		And they are liberated.


[VI.107]
	If it’s the case
	That all these things
	Have nothing
	In & of themselves,

	Then they are like
	The child of
	A barren woman,
	
	And the same
	In a nominal sense:
	They really do
	Possess none.

	And then
	For that reason,
	They could exist
	Only by nature.


[VI.108]
	Strands of hair
	Or the like act
	As objects

	For a person
	Who possesses
	Cataracts or such;

	And these
	Have never started.

	So let’s assume first
	That we seek out
	The way that
	Things really are.

	After that,
	There’s the connection
	To the cataracts
	Of misunderstanding.


[VI.109]
		Now suppose there is
		A dream, along
With a city of the
Craving spirits.

Or water flowing
From a mirage—
An illusionist at work—
Or a reflection,

Or something
Of the like:
Things that
Never started.

When we come to see,
We can say that
They are equivalent

In not being
Existing entities.

And you should be
Asking, how are
All these things?

It doesn’t make sense!


[VI.110]
		Speaking purely,
		Things never start
		In any way at all.

		And yet this is not
		Something that can be
		An object that is seen

		In the eyes of the
		Everyday world,

		In the way that
		They would regard
		The child of
		A barren woman.

		And since it is not,
		This statement
		Is itself inconclusive.


[VI.111]
		The child
		Of a barren woman
		Is not something

		Which arises
		All on its own accord;

		It has no existence
		In & of itself.

		Neither is it
Something which exists,
In the everyday world.

Just so,
All these entities
Have never arisen through
		Some essential nature;

		For the world, or from
		The point of view
		Of suchness.
 

[VI.112]
		For this reason,
		The Teacher has stated
		That all the objects
		That exist consist

		Of peace from
		The very beginning;

		And are devoid
		Of arising;

		And that they have,
		By their very nature,
		Gone entirely to nirvana.

		As such,
		They have never
		Displayed any arising.


[VI.113]
		Things like
		Pitchers and the like
		Are not such that
		
		They exist
		In their essence;

		They do though
Exist as they are
Spoken of in the
World at large.

All the entities
That exist
Follow this
Very same pattern;

It is not the case
That they would
Have to be

The equivalent
Of the child
Of a barren woman.


[VI.114]
	It is indeed the case
	That these entities
	Do not arise without
	Any cause at all;

	Nor from the cause
	Of some supreme
Being, or the like.

And because
These do not arise
From themselves,

From something other,
Or from both,

Their arisal
Most definitely flows
From a dependence.


[VI.115]
		The fact is
		That entities will
		Always spring forth
		In dependence.

		Thus these notions
		Cannot stand up
		Under close examination.

		And thus things
		Occur in dependence [f. 210a];

		This logic serves
		To sever all the cables
		Of the vast net
		Of terrible viewpoints.


[VI.116]
		We have already examined,
		In depth, these notions
		That things could exist,

		And how things
		Could never be.

		In the absence
		Of things,
		These will never
		Come up;

		It’s like,
		For example,
		The way that

		Fire can never occur
		In the absence
Of firewood.


[VI.117]
		Common beings
		Are enslaved by notions;

		Deep practitioners
		Do not imagine things,
		And become liberated.

		The wise
Have presented this:

The results of
Correct analysis,
Turning away
From those notions.		


[VI.118]
		Logical arguments
		In the classical commentary
		Were not made

		Out of a love for
		Disputation.

		They were for teaching
		The concept of suchness,
		For the purpose
		Of liberating beings.

		Suppose it is the case
		That, when we undertake
		To present the details
		Of our explanations
		Of suchness,

		The texts of other
		Groups are shattered.
		You cannot fault us
		For that.


[VI.119]
	When we have attachment
	To our own viewpoints,
	And when—
	In the same way—
	
	We feel disturbed
	By views, we are
	Falling into those
	Very notions.

	In this case,
	We will be able
	To clear away

	Those tendencies
	To feel attachment
	And aversion—

	When we are able
	To analyze things,
	We find ourselves
	Liberated, with speed.


[VI.120]
		Our intellect
		Comes to see

		That each & every
		One of the troubles
		Of the negative emotions

		Comes from
		The view of destruction.

		What we come to realize
		Is that what this
Thinks it sees
Is the self;

And then the
Deep practitioner
Works to stop
The self.
		

[VI.121a]
		That River system
		Imagines a consumer
		Which is a self that is
Unchanging & functioning;

Although not
The creator.

It does not have
The qualities, and
Performs no activity.	


[VI.121b]
	Based upon various
	Minor distinctions,

	There have developed
	The different systems
	Of the River Schools.


[VI.122]
		Because things
		Are devoid of arising,
		
Like the child
		Of a barren woman,

		It is not the case
With the self—
		They are not reality.

		This cannot
		Logically be
		The basis for

		Our tendency to
		Grasp to some “me.”

		We deny
		The existence
		In a deceptive sense
		As well.


[VI.123]
		It’s because
		All the features that
		These River Schools
		Describe both in

		Those classical commentaries
		And these classical commentaries

		Are themselves
		Drawn into question
		
		By the logic of things
		Never arising
		That they declare among
		Themselves so widely.

		These characteristics
		Are, none of them,
		Things that can exist.
	

[VI.124]
		And this is why
		There is no self
		Separate from the
		Parts of the person:

		Because you could
		Never establish
		The capacity to hold
		To some that didn’t
		Involve the parts.

		Neither are we saying
		That it is the basis
		For the tendency
		To hold to some “me”

		That the world
		Thinks of;

		That is not something
		Which could ever
		Make sense.

		And that’s because
		Even then we could
		View something
		As the self.
	

[VI.125]
		Consider too
Those beings
		Who have passed
		Their lives—

		Over the length
		Of many eons—
		As an animal:

		Those who may not
		Be perceiving it
		As never starting,
		And as unchanging.

		Even with these
		We can see
		Engaging in
		Grasping on
		To some “me [f. 210b].”

		We can say then
		That there does not
		Exist any kind
		Of a self at all

		Which could be
		Separate from the
Parts to a person.


[VI.126]
		There is no self
		Which exists
		As separate from
		The parts to
		The person.

		As such,
		Seeing a self
		Takes as its
		Object of focus
		Only the parts.

		Some number
		Describe the support
		Of the view of a self
	
		As consisting
		Of all five
Of the parts.

		Some assert
		That it is only
		The mind.


[VI.127]
		Suppose the five parts
		Were the self.

		In that case then—
		Since these are multiple—

		One would also
		Have multiple selves.

		The self would be
		Something substantial,

		And the one
		That acts to view these
		Engages in substance;

		As such, it is not something
		Which is mistaken.

	
[VI.128]
		When we attain nirvana,
		The self would surely
		Have discontinued.

		In the instants
		Prior to nirvana,
		They would have been
		Going in & out
		Of existence.

		There could be
		No agent involved,
		And so there would be
		No such result.

		What was collected
		By one would be
		Consumed by another.


[VI.129a]
		Suppose it is the case
		That there is a stream
		That exists
		In & of itself;

		And so there is 
		No problem here.

		When we did
		Our examination earlier,
		We already explained
		The problems.

		As such, it is
		Illogical that the parts
		To a person,

		Or the mind,
		Are the self.


[VI.129b]
		And that’s because
		There was none
		About the universe

		Having a beginning
		And an end,
		And so on.		


[VI.130]
		When your deep
		Practitioner sees
		That things have no
		Self-nature,

		Then at that point
		Those entities
		Have no existence.

		Suppose we eliminate
		An unchanging self;

		At that point,
		As such,
		Your mind,
		And parts to
		The person,

		Could never be
		The self.


[VI.131]
		When your
		Deep practitioner
		Sees that there
		Is no self,

		They must not
		Realize the nature
		Of form and the rest.

		They would still be
		Engaging in form
		While perceiving it,

		And subject to
		The arisal of
		Desire and the like;

		Because they had
		Not yet realized
		The essential nature.


[VI.132]
		This is because
		Of statements
		By the Teacher:

		Suppose you assert
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are a self,

		Because of statements
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are the self.

		That is to deny
		A self different
		From the parts
		To the person.

		Other sutras express
		That form
		Is not the self,
		And so on.


[VI.133]
		This is because—
		In other sutras—
		It is stated that

		Neither form
		Nor feelings
		Are the self;

		Nor is
		Discrimination;
		Nor are
		The other factors;
		Nor is consciousness.

		As such,
		The statement
		In sutra is not
		An assertion
		
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are the self.


[VI.134]
		When it states
		That the parts
		To the person
		Are the self,

		It’s the collection
		Of the parts
		To the person.

		It is not though
		That the essence
		Of the parts is.

		It could not be
		The savior,
		Or the trainer,
		Or the absolute lord.

		Since that
		Would not exist,
		This could not be
		The collection.


[VI.135a]
		At that point,
		When we pile
		The collection

		Of the various
		Components together,

		Then that would be
		A wagon itself.

		It’s the same,
		Whether you’re talking
		About a wagon
		Or a self.


[VI.135b]
		Sutra states that
		It is on the basis
		Of the parts
		To the person;

		As such, the simple
		Accumulation
		Of the parts

To the person
Is not the self [f. 211a].


[VI.136]
		And suppose you say
		It’s the outline.

		This is
Something possessed
By physical things;

With you,
These would be
Referred to
As the “self.”

It would not
Be the case that
The mind and such
Were this same self;

That’s because
These are not things
Which possess
Any outline.		


[VI.137]
		The one doing
		The taking,
		Themselves,
		
		Would be
		What is taken;

		It is illogical
		To say that these
		Could be
		A single thing.

		In that case
		The action
		And the agent
		
		Would constitute
		A single entity.

		There cannot exist
		An agent;

		Suppose you
		Are thinking
		That it is
		The action.

		This cannot be
		The case,
		For the reason that
		
		There is no such thing
		As an action
		Without an agent.


[VI.138]
	Because the Able One
	Has presented a teaching
	Which states that
	
	The self is something
	Which depends upon

	The six elements we know as
	Earth, water, fire, and wind;
	Consciousness, and space;

	As well as the six bases
	Of contact involving
	The eye and so on;


[VI.139]
And has also stated
That it is taken as
The entities

Of the mind and
The mental functions,

It would be inappropriate
To say that it constituted
These here, or any one
Of these same things;

Neither is it
The simple collection.

As such, the state
Of mind which has held
To “This is me” 
Is not upon these.


[VI.140]
		At the point
		Where one perceives
		The lack of self,

		We have to eliminate
		The self which is
		Unchanging;

		And yet neither
		Do we accept
		That this is the basis
		For our grasping
		To a “me.”

		And so then
		We have this position
		Of understanding
		That this simple self
		Could never exist;

		And then we tear out
		This view of some self,
		With finality.

		It is exceedingly strange!


[VI.141]
		Some saw
		That there was
		A snake living

		Inside the wall
		Of their own home;
		They live in it.

		And then
		Someone dispels
		All their worries
		By saying
		“There’s no elephant!”

		They are also able
		To stop being afraid
		About the snake.

		Oh my gosh!
		Others would consider
		This kind of person
		A real laughing stock!		


[VI.142]
		The self is not something
		That exists in the parts
		To the person; neither
	
		Are the parts to the person
		Something which exists
		In the self.

		Why can we say this?
		Suppose here they
		Were perfectly separate.

		If these ideas were
		Indeed the case here,
		
		This would be
		A mistaken imagining,
		For the reason that

		There could be
		No possibility of
		Being essentially other.


[VI.143]
		We do not accept
		That the self is something
		That could possess form;

		Why we say so
		Is that there is no
		Possibility of the self;

		Therefore the point of
		The connection possessed
		By them is not something
		That could exist.

		Suppose it were
		To something being other:
		“He is possessed of a blackie.”

		Suppose he was possessed
		Of a physical form where
		There was no separate thing.

		The relationship of the self
		To the form is neither the same;
		Nor are they essentially different.


[VI.144]
		Form is not
		The self;

		The self is not
		Possessed of form;

		Form does not
		Possess the self;

		And the self does not
		Possess form.

		You should understand
		All the parts to the person
		Just as that, as four
		Different types.

		These are accepted
		As the twenty
		Views as a self.


[VI.145]
		The mountain of view
		Is destroyed with
		The diamond weapon
		
		Of realizing
		That no self exists.

		The self that was
		Will be destroyed
		Along with it.

		The high peaks
		That are found
		On the massive
		Central mountain

		Of the view
		Of the collection of
		Destruction are these [f. 211b].		
		

[VI.146]
		Some people say
		It cannot be described
		As precisely those,

		Or something
		Perfectly different;

		Or as unchanging
		Or changing

		Or anything
		Of the like.

		They assert
		That the person
		Exists substantially,

		And they further assert
		That this is something
		Which is perceived
		By the six types
		Of consciousness;

		And they believe
That the same is
		The basis for the
		Tendency to hold
		To a “me.”


[VI.147]
		For what reason?
		We don’t understand
		How the mind’s
		
		Relationship to form
		Cannot be described.

		This same idea
		Can never be described
		As things that exist
		As entitites.

		Suppose that
		There were some
		Possible cases
		Of the self

		That existed
		As entities.

		Entities that existed
		In a way similar
		To the mind

		Would have to be
		Indescribable.


[VI.148]
	What is the reason?
	The relationship
	Of your water pitcher—

	Which has an
	Essential nature
	Where it cannot exist
	As an entity—

	To form and the rest
	Is not something
	Which can be described.

	As such, that self
	Is something whose
	Relationship to

	The parts
	To the person
	Cannot be described.

	You cannot understand
	That it itself exists.


[VI.149]
		You would be
		Asserting that
		Your consciousness

		Was not something
		Different from
		Your self;

		And asserting
The position
That it was
No different entity

Than form
And the rest.

With entities
We see that things
Are two types;

For this reason,
The self cannot exist,

For it is devoid
Of the quality
Of an entity.


[VI.150]
	For that reason,
	The basis for
	Holding to some
	“Me” is not
	A substantial thing.

	It is not
	Something other
	Than the parts
	To the person.

	Neither is it
	The essence
	Of the parts
	To the person.

	Neither is it
	The basis;

	Neither is this
	Possessed of those.

	This is something
	That exists through
	Dependence upon
	The parts of the person.


[VI.151]
		We are not saying
		That a wagon
		Is other than
		Its component parts.

		Neither are we
		Saying that
		It could be
		The other;

		Neither that
		It is possessed
		Of those,

		Or upon its
		Component parts,

		Or that the
		Component parts
		Are there;

		Neither that
		It is the 
		Simple collection,
		Or the outline.

		All this applies.


[VI.152]
		Suppose it were the case
		That the simple collection
		Were the wagon.

		In that case then,
		When piled together,
		That too would have to be
		A perfect wagon.

Why is that the case?
If the whole which incorporates
The various component parts
Is absent, then the 
Component parts themselves
Are also absent.

It would not be logical,
Either, to say that
The simple outline of
The component parts
Was the wagon.


[VI.153]
		Your outline
		And each separate
		Component part
		As they existed prior,

		And after they
		Have been incorporated
		Into the wagon,

		Would be as well
		Just the same way.

		It would be there
		In those separated;

		Just so, the wagon
Would no longer
Be something that
Was there now.


[VI.154]
		Suppose we refer
		To that point
		In time now
		Of the wagon itself;

		There would be
Separate shapes
Of the wheels & the rest;

And suppose that
These were held.

This though
Could never be,
And for this reason
It is not the case

That the simple shape
Could exist as
The wagon itself.	


[VI.155]
		And why would that
		Be the case?

		According to you,
		There would be
		No collection at all.
		
		As such, the outline
		Is not something of
The collection of
		The component parts.

		How then could it
		Ever be the case
		That here something that
		Wasn’t anything at all

		Could be the outline
		Which provided
		The basis?		


[VI.156]
	What you are proposing
	Is that in this case
	There is another idea
	Which holds [f. 212a],

	Which is that
	Things possess
	A nature of
	The unreal aspect
	Of a result,

	Because they have
	Depended upon
Causes which are
Themselves unreal.

And we are to
Understand that
All of them
Do their growing.


[VI.157]
	But what’s the point?
	Visible form and the rest
	Are staying in that way;

	And they say we can
	Conceive of this
	As the vase—

	This as well can
	Only be incorrect.

	There exists no arisal;
	As such, neither form
	Nor the rest exist.

	For the same reason,
	It would be incorrect
	To say that these
	Could be the shape.


[VI.158]
	Looking at that
In and of itself,
	Or even in the way
	That the world does,

	Admittedly this doesn’t
	End up something
	That could be established.
	
	But leaving off
	This close examination,
	Confining ourselves
	To the world,

	Here the labeling
	Has been done
	In reliance upon
	The component parts.


[VI.159]
		The thing itself
		Is a composite;
		This same thing
		Is a whole.

		This same wagon
		We can call
		“An agent.”

		Living beings
		Are designated
		In the same way.

		People are thus
		Established as
		Nothing other than
		The ones that do
		This incorporating.

		The deceptive
		In the common parlance
		Of the world would be
		“Don’t ruin that.”


[VI.160]
		Not finding anything
		Using seven different
		Options means that
	
		The way things
		Really are is something
		Which is devoid
		Of existing.

		In this, the
Deep practitioner
Also engages with ease
In suchness.

As such,
Here we are
Also to accept
This, in the
Same manner.


[VI.161]
		If it’s the case
		That a wagon
		Cannot exist
		In itself, then

		At that point
		The whole of the
		Component parts
		Cannot exist;

		Those component
		Parts too cannot exist.

		Suppose the wagon
		Is burned up;
		The component parts
		Are gone—

		We follow now
		This metaphor.

		The fire of the mind
		Burns up the whole
		Of the component parts;

		And those
		Component parts.


[VI.162]
	We are asserting
	That similarly,
	In the convention of
	The everyday world,
	
	The self as well
	Depends upon the
	Parts to the person;
	The realms; and
	Just so the six
	Doors of sense—

	And thus
Becomes a perfect
	Incorporator of them.
	
	What is incorporated
	Is the act, while this
	Is the agent.


[VI.163]
	Because that entity
	Is not something
	That exists,

	This could not be
	Something perfectly
	Solid, or not solid;

	This neither
	Starts nor stops;

	Nor could this exist as
	Perfectly unchanging,
	Or so forth—

	It does not exist
	As that itself,
	Or something
	Essentially different.


[VI.164]
		It is indeed the case
		That a state of mind
		Is forever arising with

		All those living beings
		Which holds to “me.”

		Everything there
		Is that which is of it:

		Everything that makes up
		That self towards which
		There arises the state
		Of mind that
Holds to “me.”

It is something
That stems from
That dark state
Of ignorance

Towards one
Which is unexamined,
In the parlance
Of the world.		


[VI.165]
		An agent
		Has no existence,
		
		And what they
		Act towards
		Has no existence
		Either.

		As such,
		Something belonging
		To the self

		Is not something
		That could ever exist
		With a self
		That could not
		Itself exist.

		As such,
		That deep practitioner
		Who sees that
		Both the self
		
		And what belongs
		To the self 
		Are empty
		Is completely liberated.


[VI.166]
Let’s consider
Things like
Water pitchers
And bolts of cloth
And rolls of felt;

As well as
Armies and forests,
And strings of
Beads, and trees [f. 212b].

Or houses and carts,
And meeting places,
And guest houses,
And all such entities;

And in the same vein,
		We should understand
		These things as well:

All those things which
These same people
Would ascribe.

And why is
This the case?
It’s because this
Lord of the Able Ones

Has no argument
With the world.


[VI.167]
		There are
Component parts,
		Qualities,
		Wanting itself,
		Defining characteristics,
		Firewood, and so on;

		And then there are
		The combination
		Of the qualities,
		The whole of
		The component parts,
		The one with the wanting,
		The thing which is defined,
		Fire, and so on.

		We can use the same
		Examination on them
		As we did on the wagon;

		Using the seven options,
		We cannot find
		Anything that exists.

		And if we proceed
		In a different manner,
		They are all things
		That do exist, if only
		In the parlance of
		The everyday world.


[VI.168]
		Suppose a cause
		Were to give rise
		To what it acts
		To instigate.

		In this case,
		The cause
		Would be that.

		If it did not act
		To trigger a result,
		Then with
		Nothing such,
		
		It would be one
		Which had no cause.

		The result as well—
		If there is a cause—
		Will grow.

		Thus then
		Whatever could
		Either one
		Occur from?

		Please describe
		To us which of these
		Is earlier, and which
		Could occur.


[VI.169]
		Let’s suppose
		You respond that
		The cause acts to
		Trigger the result
		
		Through making contact
		With that result.

		In this case then
		These two would
		Constitute a 
Single force.

If so, the trigger
And the result
Would become
Inseparable.

And suppose
They are
Completely separate.

There wouldn’t be
Anything about the cause
That distinguished it
From things that
Weren’t the cause.

They have given up
These two; and there
Is further no different
Idea which could exist.


[VI.170]
		As such, this cause
		Of yours could never
		Act to trigger a result.

		And as such,
		There is no such thing
		As something that
You could refer to
		As a “result.”

		Devoid of a result,
		The cause would be
		Without any reason;

		And that is also
Something that
Could never be.

And suppose
It were the case;
These two would also be
Similar to an illusion.

As such,
The problem
That has been raised

		Does not apply
		To me.

		These things
		Of the world
		Do, further, exist.


[VI.171]
		When you attack
		My position,

		Is it through
		Making contact
		With what it attacks,

		Or without 
		Making contact?

		Doesn’t the problem
		Stated also apply
		To you yourself?

		Let’s consider a case
		Of expressing just such, 
		Which ends up destroying
		Only their own position.

		In this situation,
		It is not the case
		That your attack is
		Anything with the ability

		To do any successful
		Attacking at all.


[VI.172]
		What’s the case here
		Is of a statement
		Of necessary consequence
		
		Whose resulting implication
		Applies equally as well.

		This failure of reasoning
		Represents a dismissal
		Of all the entities
		That exist;

		As such,
		Your position
		Could not represent
		The stance of
		The holy ones.

		The fact is that,
		For you,
		Suppose one
		Has no position
		Of their own;

		What then are
		They debating for?


[VI.173]
		First there is
		The problem that
		Has already been raised,

		Of whether the attack
		Serves to attack the idea
		Which is attacked

		Without making contact
		With it, or by making
		Contact with it [f. 213a].

		Here it arises
		With that person who
		Surely has a position;

		We though
		Do not take
		Any such position;

		As such,
		This statement of
		A necessary consequence

		Is not something
		Which is even possible.	


[VI.174]
		Let’s consider how you
		Can see a reflection,
		
		And based on that
		You can observe
		Certain features

		That are present in
		The disk of the sun.
		
		When there is an eclipse
		Of that sun or
		Something else of the like,
		
		You can watch it.

		Admittedly it is
		Not right that the sun
		Either does make

		Actual contact 
		With the reflection,
		Or not.

		But something
		Did occur, based on it,
		If only nominally.


[VI.175]
		It may not be
		The real thing,
		But still it helps us

		To establish the beauty
		Of the original object
		Being reflected.

		As such, it does
		Possess that.

		Here, in the same way,
		We seek to clean
		The face of wisdom.

		And we should
Understand that we
Come to a realization

Of the thesis that we
Are undertaking
To establish

With reasonings too
We would call
Devoid of any
Correctness:

That we can see
Have the force.


[VI.176]
		Suppose then
		It were the case
		That this entity
		Of what we refer to
		As a logical statement

		Meant to help others
		Comprehend what
		We are trying to prove—

		Along with the
		Essential nature of what
		We are trying to prove,

		That exact thing
		Which we hope will be
		Directly understood—
		Could exist.

		And suppose that
		We put together reasoning
		That they did make contact,
		Or anything of the like.

		This is further
		Something that
		Could never exist;

		As such,
For you it is just
		Some exhausting
		Expenditure of effort.


[VI.177]
		They are extremely
		Simple ways that have
		The capacity to help people

		Come to the realization
		That all existing entities
		Are those things:
		That do not exist.

		It is not the case though
		That, in the same way,

		Those others would be
		Enabled with ease
		To comprehend the nature.

		What on earth
		Are you doing,

		Expending such
		Devoted efforts towards
		Those of this world,

		With your widespreading
		Net of bad logic?


[VI.178]
		We utilize what we learned
		In those earlier presentations,
		Those points additional
		To our attack.

		We sought to give
		A response to express
		The position about

		Contact or anything
		Of the like; so here,
		We engaged in
		Our own attack.

		There does not exist one
With further argument.

The remainder
Already described
In these words

Can be understood
From this very position.		


[VI.179]
	In order to free beings,
He stated that
	There are no objects

	Which possess
	Some self-nature;

	And that this
	Has two divisions:
	
	That to the person,
	And that to things.

	Having taught as such,
He went on to
Lay out all the
Different divisions

Of this very thing,
For different disciples.


[VI.180]
	He utilized
	Great detail,

	First explaining
	Sixteen divisions
	Of emptiness,

	And then he
	Went over the same
	In a briefer way,
	With four types.

	And he acknowledged
	As well that
These constituted
The greater way.


[VI.181]
	Why is it?  Because
	The nature of this
	Is that the eye
	Is empty of the eye.

	In the same way
	We also refer
	To the ear, the nose,
	The tongue, the body,
	And the thought [f. 213b].


[VI.182]
		They are not things
		Which remain
		In a solid manner;

		Nor do they stop
		In this way.

		The eye and the
		Rest of the six
		
		Do not exist
		Through any nature;

		What we accept
		As being emptiness
		On the inside
		Is this fact.


[VI.183]
	Form is empty
	Of existing through form,	

	Due to the fact
	That the very nature
	Of it is that.


[VI.184a]
		The fact of
The lack of a nature
		To form and the rest
		Is what we say is
		“Emptiness on the outside.”


[VI.184b]
		It is both;
		And the fact
		That it does not exist

		Through any
		Essential nature

		Constitutes emptiness
		On the outside
		And the inside.


[VI.185]
		The fact that entities
		Are without any nature
		Of their own is what
		
		Masters refer to
		As emptiness.

		We assert that
		The fact that
		They are empty

		Is in turn also empty
		Of some essential nature
		Of emptiness itself.		


[VI.186]
		We say that
		The emptiness of
		The thing which
		We refer to itself
		As emptiness is
		“Emptiness emptiness.”

		These statements
		Were made in order
		To block the tendency

		Of those whose minds
		Were grasping,
		Holding that emptiness
		Was a real thing.


[VI.187]
		Because the vessel of 
The world, or the
Living beings contained,

Extends in expanse
Over no less than
The entirety,

Our example of
The infinity has
No final edge;

And thus is massive
In the extent
Of the directions.


[VI.188]
	The fact that
	All ten directions
	Are empty is
	“Great emptiness.”

	It was taught
	In order to stop
	The holding that
	They are vast.


[VI.189]
	This is of ultimate significance,
Here, nirvana; because
This is the highest purpose.

The fact that this
Is empty of its own—

This is ultimate emptiness.
	

[VI.190]
	The goal here
	Is to help put a stop
	To the tendency

		That people have
		In their mind
		To hold this nirvana
		As actual.

		This is why
		The one who knows
		The ultimate

		Undertook to teach
		This ultimate emptiness.


[VI.191]
	The three realms
	Are referred to
	As produced things,

	Since they come
	From conditions.

	That these are
	Completely empty
	Of any was taught

	As the emptiness
	Of produced things.


[VI.192]
		Any entity
		Which is devoid
		Of any arising
		Or changing—

		And also devoid
		Of staying—

		Is what we refer to
		As “an existing entity
		Which has not
		Been produced.”

		The fact that
		This type is empty
		Of its own is

		“The emptiness of
		Things that exist
		But were not produced.”


[VI.193]
	A situation where
	There is no case of
	An extreme

	Was described as
	“Going beyond
All extremes.”

What is the
Emptiness of this,
Simply that,

Is where we use
The expression
“Emptiness beyond
All extremes.”


[VI.194]
	The cycle of suffering
	Was described as having
	
	No first beginning
	And no final end.

	This is because it has
	No beginning limit,
	Nor an ending limit.

	Coming and going
	Are devoid;
	As such, our existence
	Is similar to a dream [f. 214a].


[VI.195]
	The fact that
	This is devoid
	
	Was referred to in
	The classical commentaries

	With the description,
	“Emptiness where there
	Is no beginning,
	And no end.”


[VI.196]
		The expression “given up”
		Can be used both
		In the sense of
		“Throwing off”
		And “abandoning.”

		“Never given up”
		Means “cannot
		Be sent off”:

A reference to
No kind of thing		
		That could ever 
		Be relinquished.


[VI.197]
		It is an essential
		Never being given up;

		The fact of the emptiness
		Of this particular object
		Was then referred to
		As emptiness:

		This is because of
		Its being something
		That we should
		Never relinquish.		


[VI.198]
	The essential nature
	Of produced things
	And the like has been
	Named their “very nature.”

	And why is it so?
	The essential nature
	Of produced things
	And such is not something
	That was ever created

	By the students,
	Or self-made Buddhas,
	Or children of the Victors,
	Or Those Who Have Gone
	That Way.  The essential nature


[VI.199]
		Of produced things
		And the like
Has been named 
Their “very nature.”

This very thing
Is empty of itself;
		
		And this fact then
		Is the emptiness
		Of any nature.


[VI.200]
	There are the eighteen
	Categories of existence;
	The six forms of contact;
	And the six forms of feeling
	That arise from these.

	There is everything
	That possesses form,
	And everything
	Which does not
	Possess such form.

	In the same way,
	We have those entities
	Which are produced things,

	And those which exist
	But which are not produced.


[VI.201a]
		All of these
		Various existing entities
		Possess an emptiness

		Where they are devoid
		Of their own.


[VI.201b]
		Those things
		That can be pointed to
		As being form,

		And all the rest
		Which lack being
Things, is the emptiness
Of a thing’s own quality.


[VI.202]
		What we accept
		Is that the “own quality”
		That form possesses
	
	Is that it can be pointed to
	As being form.

	Feelings consist of
That entity which
Possesses a self-nature
Of experience.

Discrimination
Holds to features;

And other factors
Act to bring together.


[VI.203]
	The own quality
	For consciousness
	Consists of being

	A state of mind
	Which perceives
	Individual objects.

	The own quality of
	The parts to the person
	Is suffering; and

	The self-nature
Or own quality
Of the categories
Of existence is that
They are poisonous snakes.


[VI.204]
		The doors of sense
		Were described
		By the Buddhas as
		
		The very doors
		For growing.

		Its own quality for
That thing we refer to as
		A “dependent relationship”

		Is the coming together
		And contact.


[VI.205]
		The perfection of giving
		Is giving away.

		The own quality
		For the ethical life
		Is turning away
		From the torment.

		The own quality
		Of patience is
		An absence of anger;

		And for joyful effort
		It is that free
		Of disreputable actions.


[VI.206]
		Meditation possesses
		Its own quality
		Of gathering together;

		The own quality of wisdom
Is a freedom from craving.

Thus the own qualities
Of the six different perfections
Have been described as
Being these ways.


[VI.207]
		Then there are the
		Concentration levels
		And the immeasurables;

		And just so, other items:
		Those for the formless realm [f. 214b].

		These are what that
		Being of Perfect Knowledge
		Described as states

		Whose own quality was
		Beyond being disturbed.


[VI.208]
		The own quality
		Of the 37 elements
		Of enlightenment

		Is those points
		Which produce 
		Our release.

		Its own quality
		For emptiness
		Is that very quality
		
Of being devoid,
		No longer focusing.


[VI.209]
		That beyond all signs
		Has its own quality
		Of peace;

		Its own quality
		For the third
		Is a freedom from
		Suffering and
		Dark ignorance.

		The own quality
		For the freedoms
		Is that they act
		To liberate us.


[VI.210]
		The forces were said
To have a quality of
		Establishing one deeply.

		The forms of
		Fearlessness of
		The Protector

		Have an essential
Nature of being
Extremely steadfast.


[VI.211]
		The perfect understandings
		Of details—confidence
		And so on—have an
		Own nature of being
		Without any extent;

		And what we call
		“Great love” accomplishes
		Help for living beings.


[VI.212]
		Great compassion
		Acts to protect,
		Entirely, those
		Who are suffering.

		Great joy has
		An own nature
		Of high joy.

		Equanimity
		Should be understood
		As having an own nature
		Of being unadmixed.		


[VI.213]
		The Dharma of the Buddhas,
		Which we assert
		Has those 18 qualities
		Of being unmixed,

		Has an own quality
		That it cannot
		Be stolen off.

		Why this is true
		Is for that reason
		That the Teacher
		Cannot be
		Stolen off.


[VI.214]
		The wisdom of
		Omniscience itself
		Is something that

		We hold to have
		An own quality of
		The direct perception.

		Those other than this
		Are only partial;
		
		As such, we would not
		Refer to them
		As direct.


[VI.215]
		The own nature
		Of those produced,

		And the own nature
		Of those which exist
		But were not produced,

		Is then for each of them
		Their emptiness
		Of that alone:

		Their emptiness
		Of some nature.


[VI.216]
		Those of the present
		Do not remain;

		And those of the past
		And the future;
		None of these exist.

		These things cannot
		Be observed, in any.

		As such,
		We refer to them
		As “unseen.”	


[VI.217]
		This state of being
		Unseen is entirely
	
		Devoid of existing
		In that essential way.

		It is not something
		That can remain
		In some solid manner,

		Nor is it something
		Which stops.
		
		As such, it is
		The emptiness,
		We say, of
		“Not seeing anything.”		


[VI.218]
		The functional
		Are “brought together,”
		Because they occur
		Through conditions,

		And an essential nature
		Of it has no existence.

		The fact that these
		Same things
		Of that convening
		Are empty

		Is what we refer to
		As “the emptiness
		Beyond all things.”


[VI.219]
		The term “things” refers,
		In a summary way,
To the five parts
To the person.

		That fact that these
		Are empty is what
		We refer to as
		“The emptiness of things.”		


[VI.220]
		This lack of things,
		In summary,
		Refers to entities

		That are things
		Which exist but
		Were not produced [f. 215a].

		The fact that these
		Same absences of things
		Are empty is

		The emptiness of
		The lack of things.


[VI.221]
		What we give
		The name of
		“The emptiness
		Of any nature”

		Is an absence
		Of any real quality
		To the nature.

		This particular nature
		Is not something produced;

		As such we give it the
		Name of “the nature.”


[VI.222]
		Whether the Buddhas
		Ever occur
		Or do not appear,
		It’s all the same.

		All entities will possess
		An emptiness, really;

		This is what we declare
		Is the emptiness
		Of being other things.


[VI.223]
		The ultimate end
		And, just so,
The true nature,

Are the emptiness
Of things.

This is how
They were declared
In those words

Presented in
The way of the
Perfection of wisdom.


[VI.224]
		The wisdom
		From this represents
		Rays of light
		That illuminate;

		We could compare it
		To an olive
		Sitting in the palm
		Of they themselves.

		Suppose we are able
		To realize that
		There is nothing about

		The entirety
		Of these three realms
		Of existence which

		Has ever started,
		Since time with
		No beginning.

		Through the power
		Of nominal reality,
		We come to the point
		Where things are stopped.


[VI.225]
		It is admittedly
		The case that
		They always have
		
		A state of mental focus
		Which is taken in
		By a cessation;

		And yet
		At the same time
		They give rise to
		
		Thoughts of compassion
		Towards living beings,

		Who have no one
		To protect them.

		Beyond that,
		They defeat,
		In their mind,

		All of those
		Individuals who are

		Born of the word
		Of Those Gone to Bliss,
		And medium buddhas.


[VI.226]
They are able
To stretch forth

Their broad, white,
Wide-spreading wings,

Of the deceptive
Side of things,
And suchness.

They are kings
Among the birds,

Soaring at the head
Of the geese
Of living beings.

By the strength
And power
Of good deeds,

They fly
To the highest:

To the far shores
Of the ocean of
The high qualities
Of the Victors.


[chapter number]
This concludes the sixth wish for enlightenment, or chapter,
 	of Entering the Middle Way.



Chapter 7
The Final Four Levels


[VII.1]
		Here at “Gone Far,”
		This one is in meditation,
		From moment to moment,
		On cessation.

		Further, they also attain
A perfection of skillful means
		Which is blazing strongly.	


[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA BDUN PA’O,,

This concludes the seventh wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.

	[VIII.1]
		They seek,
		Again and again,

		To achieve an even
		Higher degree
		Of virtue.

		These great beings
Enter “Unmoving”;

This is where
They can absolutely
Never turn back,

And special prayers
Made by them
Reach an extraordinary
Level of purity,

		While the Victors
		Undertake to
		Rouse them from
		The cessation.


[VIII.2]
		The state of mind
		Free of attachment

		No longer remains
		Combined with
		The various faults.

		As such, here at
		The eighth level

		All these impurities,
		With their roots,
		
		Are put to their
		Final rest.

		So too, we put
		A finish to the
		Negative emotions;

		And we have become
		A spiritual teacher
		For all three grounds.

		They are though
		Still unable
		To achieve

		All the riches
		Of the Buddhas,

		Which like the sky
		Are without any limits [f. 215b].


[VIII.3]
		They have put a
Stop to the cycle;

Despite that,
We attain
The ten powers.

These allow them to
Display their person

As an entire variety,
To beings of
The suffering world.
		

[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA BRGYAD PA’O,,

		This concludes the eighth wish for enlightenment,
			or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.

[IX.1]
		At the ninth,
		The forces are
		Beyond description;

		All of them
		Become pure
		In a way which is
		Totally complete.

		In like manner
		They also achieve

		The different
		Total purities of
		Their fine qualities—

		The qualities of
		Pure understanding.		


[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA DGU PA’O,,

This concludes the ninth wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.


[X.1]
		At the tenth level,
		This one receives

		The highest investment
		Into power,

		From all the Buddhas
		Of every corner.

		High knowledge
		Also reaches
		Its highest expression.

		The rains
		Are sent down
		From the rainclouds;

		Just so, the
		Children of the Victors
		Also let the rain
		Fall, spontaneously,

		For the crops
		Of virtue among
		Living beings.		


	[chapter number]
,DBU MA LA ‘JUG PA LAS, ,SEMS BSKYED PA BCU PA’O,,

This concludes the tenth wish for enlightenment,
	or chapter, from Entering the Middle Way.


The afterword

[afterword.1]
		At that point,
		This one sees
		A million Buddhas,

		And these grant
		Their blessing, and
		They perceive it.

		In this very moment
		They stay there
		For a million eons;

		And they engage
		Perfectly in this
		In both the
		
		Beginning end
		And the final end.


[afterword.2]
		This intelligent one
		Engages in,
		And then releases,
		
		A million
		Different states of
		Meditative concentration.

		They also cause a
		Million different
		Planets to tremble,

		And further have
		The capacity
		To spread light
		Over them.

		Just so, this one—
		Using their power
		Of performing miracles—

		Is able to bring
		To ripening
		A million
		Living beings.

		And they are
		Also able to
		Travel to those

		Connected in number
		To that million.


[afterword.3]
		This one acts,
		Further, to open—
		Perfectly—

		Different doorways
		Of the Dharma.

		This child
		Of the Lords
		Of the Able Ones

		Is also able
		To show their body
		Widely, in
		Different forms.

		Each of these forms
		Is, further, accompanied

		By a group
		Of a million
		Children of the Victors,
		Which they display:

		They are rich
		In a lovely circle
		Of followers.


[afterword.4]
When this intelligent one
Residing at the level
Of Perfect Happiness

Has attained those
High qualities,

Then they reside,
Just so,
At this level
Known as “Immaculate.”

And they attain,
Perfectly,

This same number,
But composed
Of a thousand members.


[afterword.5]
At five different
Levels, these come
To be completed

In groups attained of
A hundred thousand;
A billion; ten billion;
A trillion; and a
Hundred quintillion.

And then once more
Everything is multiplied,
By another thousand,
For a grand total [f. 216a].


[afterword.6]
		One staying at
		Unmoving has no
		Mistaken thoughts;

		They incorporate
		A thousand galaxies

		Of a hundred billion
		Planets each.

		Take all the atoms
		That exist
		In the worlds;

		The number
		Of fine qualities
		That they attain

		Is equal to
		That total.


[afterword.7]
		The bodhisattva
Residing at the level
Of Fine Wisdom

Possesses ten groups
Of fine qualities
Equal to the
Previously mentioned,

Multiplied by
A thousand groups
Of a hundred,

Each consisting
Of a countless number—

These attain
A number equal.


[afterword.8]
		Provisionally,
		The number of
		Fine qualities
		Here at the tenth

		Is far beyond
		Ever being expressed;
		It is nothing that
		Could ever be
		Expressed in speech.

		In sum,
		They are equal
		In count to the atoms.


[afterword.9]
		They are able
		To display,

		From the pores
		Of their body,

		The holy bodies
		Of bodhisattvas

		And totally
		Enlightened beings
		Beyond number.

		Just so, as well,
		They display—
		Moment by moment—
		
		Worldly gods,
		Demigods,
		And humans.


[afterword.10]
		It’s all because
The moon is shining
		In a perfectly clear sky—

		They make
		Great efforts further,
		At the level where,

		Earlier,
		They created
		The ten forces.

		This is found
		By them
		In “Below None”;

		Peace, the highest
		State of being:

		The ultimate among
		All high qualities,
And beyond all equal—

		This is found by them.


[afterword.11]
		Now there are
		Types of vessels,
		
		But no distinctions
		In these spaces.

		The case is the same;
		There are no distinctions

		At all engendered
		By functional entitites.

		And thus it is
		With suchness,
		Being a single song.

		This is something
		That you can
		Discern perfectly;

		As such,
		Those of you with
		Excellent understanding

		Can, in even
		Just a moment,
		Grasp all

		The knowable things
		In the universe.


[afterword.12]
		The point where
		Putting it to rest
		Is the true nature
		Of things

		Is something
		In which
		Intelligence
		Could never engage.

The idea that
A subject state of mind
		Could never engage

		Is not something
		That could ever
		Make sense

		With engagement
		In knowable objects.

		It would be a
Complete contradiction
To posit some state

Of knowing where you
Had no comprehension.

You have yet
To give rise to
A state of mind,

But you say
You will go
And teach it
Like this
To anyone else.


[afterword.13]
		Let’s consider that point
		When this is being
		Its suchness

		And, just so,
		The mind is devoid
		Of any starting.

		At this point,
		Their resting upon
		Is as though
The realization
		Of suchness.

		Let’s say
		That a particular
		State of mind
		
		Has taken on
		The aspect.

		This is it
		Having a
		Comprehension
		Of the object [f. 216b].

		Just so
		We refer to
		A knowledge
		
		In reliance upon
		The nominal.


[afterword.14]
	The holy body
	Of this one
	
	Complete in
	Its enjoyments

	Is embraced
	By merit.

	And from
Emanated bodies

	From the sky
	And other things,

	Due to the mystic
	Power of these,
	
	The sound that
	Comes forth

	Teaches the
	Suchness of things.

	From this then
	The world

	Comes as well
	To know suchness.


[afterword.15]
		It’s like how
		Here, a potter
		
		Possessed of great
		Strength puts forth
		Great effort.

		Even though for
		Quite some time

		They have made
		No current efforts,

		We can see it
		Still spinning,

		Acting as a cause
		For a pot or the like.


[afterword.16]
		In the same way,
		There is no longer
		Conscious effort

		Which has arisen in
		The present moment;

		At the same time though
		Their engagement continues,

		Residing as they are
		In an identity

		Consisting of
		The holy body
		Of all things.

		The good deeds
		Of beings,

		And their
		Extraordinary prayers,

		Project—and
		From that, it is
		Far beyond
		Any imagining.
		 

[afterword.17]
		The dry firewood of
		Each and every one of
		The knowable objects
		Is burned;

		And the peace
From that is
		The holy body
		Of all things.

		At this point, it is
Without any starting,
And without any stopping.

They have put a stop
To the mind; as such,

		This is manifested directly
		By the holy body.


[afterword.18a]
	We have peace
	And the holy body:

	We are crystal-clear,
Similar to the tree
That fulfils all wishes;

		And like the
		Wish-giving jewel,
		We have no
		Conceptual thought.


[afterword.18b]
		This is free of
		All elaboration,

		And makes its
		Appearance always

		In order to serve
		The world,
		
		Until living beings
		Are liberated.
		

[afterword.19]
		The Lord of the Able
		Has a certain
		Physical embodiment,
		Through its
		Concordant cause—

		The occasions of
		Ones past rebirths
		Come to their end.

		They are displayed
		With great clarity,
		And without
		Any jumbling,

		In every one
		Of the ways
		They occurred
		In the past;

		And so all
		Are resplendent.

		They are moreover
		Displayed all
		At the same time.


[afterword.20]
		The Buddha paradise
		Of the Lords of the Able
		Is just right;

		And the mystic
		Power and force
		Of the activities
		
		And the holy bodies
		Of these comes
		In just the right way;

		And the community
		Of the listeners
		Is in just
		The right number,

		And devote themselves
		Just right.

		And the bodhisattvas
		Possess physical forms
		In just the right manner.


[afterword.21]
	And they teach
	Just the right Dharma;

	And there are
	Just the right number
	Of eminent beings;

	And there are those
	That listen to
	The Dharma,

	And engage in the
	Various activities.

	In a single
	Holy body,
	They display

	Acts of giving
	Presenting all this
	Just right.


[afterword.22]
		In the very same way,
		They undertake

		An ethical lifestyle;
		Patience; joyful effort;
		Single-pointed focus;
		And wisdom—

		Just as they did
		Before, with no
		Single detail left
		
		Incomplete
		In their practice,
		From the beginning.

		They display—
		With utmost clarity—

		All this very same
		Activity, from every
		Single pore of
		Their holy body.				


[afterword.23]
		All of those
		Enlightened Beings
		Who are past,

		And who are
		Yet to come,
		And here in
		The present

		Teach the Dharma
		In a high song
		Which reaches to
The very ends of
Space itself [f. 217a].

They seek to bring
Comfort and relief
To beings in the
Grasp of suffering.


[afterword.24]
		From the very
		First day of
		The holy Wish,

		And up until
		They reside in the very
		Heart of Buddhahood,

		They undertake then
		All of their various
		Activities of service.

		And each one
		Of their activities
		Is repeated,

		Displayed altogether
		In every point in time,
		
		Within each & every
		Pore of their body.

		And they know
		That entities possess
		A quality of being
		Similar to an illusion.


[afterword.25]
		The same is the case
		With the activities

		Of each & every one
		Of the bodhisattvas
		Of the past, present,
		And future;

		And with all the
		Realized beings who
		Are self-made buddhas,
		And listeners too.

		And there are
		All the rest;
		All they undertook
		During that period
		When they were
		Common beings—

		All this they display
		In a single one,
		Within a pore
		Of their body.


[afterword.26]
		This thing
		Is cleaned;

		Engaging in the
		Wish to do so,

		Worlds extending
		To space are in
		A single atom.

		Admitted they can
		Display an atom
		Spreading to
		Infinite planets;

		But that atom
		Does not become
		More gross;

		Nor does that planet
		Become more fine.


[afterword.27]
You are a being
Who possesses
No conceptual
Thought at all;

And yet
You undertake
A whole variety
Of activities,

In every single
Instant of time,

Even up until
The final moment
Of existence.

Just as you make
This one display,

You make the same
Upon all the planets,
Infinite in number,

Equal in count to
		That of all the atoms.


[afterword.28]
		There is the force
		Of knowing
		What is actual,
		And what is not;

		And, just so,
		The force of mind
		Of how different
		Karmas will open.

		Then there is
		Comprehending
		The variety of wishes;

		And the force
		Of knowing
		Different propensities.


[afterword.29]
		In like manner
		We have the force
		Of understanding
		Higher or lesser
		Capacities; as well as

		The paths that lead
		To different goals;

		And understanding
		Concentration,
		Freedom,
		Single-pointed focus,
		
		Staying in deep
		Meditation, and others
		Of the like.


[afterword.30]
		So too there is
		The force of 
		Understanding
		Days gone by;

		And just so
		The state of mind
		Of the deaths of beings,

		And how they move on
		Or find their rebirth.

		And then finally
		There is the force
		Of understanding
		
		When the last
		Of the impurities
		Are finished off.

		These then
		Are the ten
		Different forces.


[afterword.31]
		Something has,
		Quite certainly,
		Arisen from
		A particular cause.

		Those who have
		A high grasp
		Of such things

		Have stated that
		This is the actuality.

		Anything happening
		In the opposite way
		Is not actual.

		Eliminating all stopping
		Towards knowing
		Infinite objects
		Of perception

		Is what we refer to
		As the force.


[afterword.32]
		There is what
		Is desirable
		And what is
		Not desirable;

		And then the
		Opposite of these.

		There are karmas
		Which are entities
		Which finish off;

		And the great variety
Of ripenings.

What we accept then
As the force is

The power of knowledge
Engaging in objects
In a way which is
Unstoppable;

Taken in by the
Past, present,
And future,

Extending to all
Knowable things [f. 217b].


[afterword.33]
		There are
Wishes which occur
		By force of desire
		And so on—

		An extremely
		Great number
		Of different wishes;

		Those lesser,
		The inbetween,
		And those which are
		Extremely elevated.

		And there are hopes
		By those different
		From these—

		Hopes which
		Are obscured.

		Here we have
		A knowledge
		Which travels

		To the three of
		The past, present,
		And future—
		Which covers all.

		This we refer to
		As the force.
		
		
[afterword.34]
		Those who are masters
		In the different categories
		Of an Enlightened Being

		Have described
Those things that are
The nature of the eye
		And so on as
		The propensities.

		The infinite variations
		Of the knowledge of
		Totally enlightened beings

		Engage in the details
		Of all the different
		Categories; this is

		What we assert
		Constitutes the force.


[afterword.35]
		There is that
State of imagination
Which is not correct,

And so on—
What we assert
To be supreme,

In a particularly
Sharp form.
	
		And then there are
		What we refer to
		As “not supreme”:

		Only middling,
		Or quite dull.

		There are the
		Eye and the rest,
		And the way these
		Inform, or have

		The power to
		Complete, each other.

		Omniscience has
		No density
		Towards them;

		This was spoken
		To be the force.		


[afterword.36]
		Some paths lead
		To the state of a
		Victor themselves;

		Some to the
		Enlightenment of
		A self-made Buddha.

		Others lead to
		The enlightenment
		Of the listener;

		Or to a life as
		A craving spirit,
		Or an animal,

		A worldly god,
		A human,
		Or a hellbeing,

		And so on.
		What we say
		Is the force

		Is a knowledge
		Of all these
		
Which is
Without density, 
		As well as infinite.


[afterword.37]
Then there are
The details among
The activities of

Deep practitioners
On infinite
Numbers of worlds:

Concentration;
The eight total freedoms;
Those states of quietude
Which are truly pure;

And deep meditation,
Whether single or eight.

What we describe
As the force is that
Unstoppable form
Of knowing all these.


[afterword.38]
		We have lived then
		In a cycle for the
		Total amount of time
		That we have possessed
		Dark ignorance.

		There are all the
		Beings that we and
		Other living creatures
		Have each lived though,

		In the past: this total
		Amount—infinite;
		And the foundation
		For them.  And so

		Here is a state
		Of mind which
		Unstoppable
		
		Towards all these,
		As well as the
		Specific place
		Where they took place.

		A type of perception
		Like this is what
		We refer to
		As the force.


[afterword.39]
		And then there is
		The death, and
		Moving on, that
		
		All beings
		Have experienced

		In the form of each
		Separate living thing;
		As well as the rebirth.

		Many are brought
		To light, located
		In worlds laid
		Across infinite
		Space itself.

		When we know
		Them in that time,
		We have no attachment,

		For they are all
		Entirely pure—
		An infinity.

		This is what
		We refer to
		As the force.


[afterword.40]
		The Victors,
		Who know all
		Things there are,

		Use these forces—
		With speed—
		To destroy the
		Negative emotions,

		Along with the
		Deep seeds.

		Those who are students,
		And the rest, put a stop
		To the negative emotions
		Using their intelligence [f. 218a];

		This then constitutes
		A state of knowledge
		Which is free of density,

		And this is what
		We refer to as the
		Force of the infinite.


[afterword.41]
		It is not as though
		The winged ones
		Must eventually

Come to a stop
Because there is
No more sky;

Rather, this one flies
Until their strength
Is exhausted—

And then they
Must turn back.

The students
And those in
Their company,

And the buddhas
And the children
Are similar:

They can describe
The high qualities
Of the Enlightened Ones,

Similar to the sky
In being infinite,

But they will
Have to stop,

Without having
Listed them all.


[afterword.42]
		Thus how could
		Someone like me
		Ever be able

		To understand,
		And then to express,

		These high qualities
		That you possess?

		Nonetheless,
		I have thrown aside
		Any doubts,

		And boldly offered
		Just the barest list,

		Because those
		Have been described
		By The Arya,
		Nagarjuna.


[afterword.43]
		The profound here
		Is emptiness;

		The other
		Fine features
		Are the widespread.

		When we come
		To an understanding
		Of both the profound
		And the widespread,

		We will be able
		To attain these
		Fine features.


[afterword.44]
		You continue on
		To all three worlds,
		Because you possess
		
		A holy form which
		Never shifts out;

		You use your
		Emanations to travel.

		And then you
		Make a display
		Of taking
		Your holy birth,

		And undertake
		To teach the Wheel
		For enlightenment
		And peace.

		Thus do you act
		Towards the world,

		Bound tightly
		In the shackles

		Of their manifold
		Hopes, sporting in
		All kinds of roles.

		Out of your compassion,
You act to lead
		Each & every one
		On to their nirvana.	


[afterword.45]
Why have we taken
Our approach?

Even though there is
Nothing there
Which is our focus,

We have been presenting
Clearing away
Each & every impurity,

A topic different
From discussing suchness.

It is not the case
That we are suggesting
Further that one

Rely upon differing
Versions of the
Suchness of things—
Upon divisions.

Nor is it the case
That the insight
Which takes suchness
As its object
Possesses separate ones.

Thus it is that you
Have taught to beings
One which is indivisible,
With no equal
Among ways.


[afterword.46]
		Now there is
		A certain reason:

		Something which
Functions to trigger
Problems within
Living beings.

And that is
The presence of
Those degenerations.

As such, the realms
In which Buddhas act
Are too deep
For the world;

They cannot engage
In something
With such depths.

Because the fact is
That you, Those Who
Have Gone to Bliss,

Possess in conjunction
Knowledge and
A method consisting
Of compassion.

And further you
Made a certain
Commitment:

“I will liberate
Living beings.”


[afterword.47]
		Thus it is
		That a master

		Who is trying to
		Dispel the fatigue

		That a group of
People might display

In a voyage to
The Isle of Jewels

Sets forth visions of
A lovely magical city,
Long before.

Just so do you
Undertake a
Certain way;

All this is meant
To attract their minds

To the way
Of total peace.

		And then separately,
		After they had 
		Trained themselves

		In thoughts of
		Total isolation [f. 218b],
		You taught them.
		

[afterword.48]
		There are all the lands
		Of Enlightened Beings,
		
		Paradises in every
		Corner of the universe.

		There exist,
		In these worlds,
		
		A certain number
		Of atoms of dust.

		And the eons
That it has taken
Those Gone to Bliss

To reach that most
High, and holy, and
Supreme enlightenment

Are equal to
That very number.

Even so,
This particular
Secret of yours

Is not something
We would normally
Describe openly.


[afterword.49]
		A Victor remains
		Until all the world

		Reaches to that
		Highest state
		Of absolute peace,

		And also
		Until that day
		When space itself
		Comes to its
		Complete dissolution.

		They have been
		Given birth by
		The Mother,
		Wisdom, and then

		Compassion,
		Acting in the manner
		Of a wet nurse.
		
		How then could
		We ever say
		That you possessed
		Some total peace?


[afterword.50]
		Due to the problem
		Of dark ignorance,

		Those of the world
		Eat a meal containing
		A certain poison.

		Love comes
		Into you for them,
		The members of
		Your own family.

		This is not
		The suffering
		That a mother feels
		For a beloved child

		Who has,
		In a similar way,
		Mistakenly eaten
		Some poison;

		Which means
		That it is not
		The case that

		The Protectors
		Have travelled
		Only to some

		Supreme and
		Final peace.


[afterword.51]
		What is the
		Reason for this?

		It is all because
		Those who are
		Not well versed

		Still possess
		A state of mind
		Where they have
		Strong craving.

		And because of this,
		They undergo
		Periods when they
		Are born & destroyed.

		They are torn
		From what feels
		Attractive, and
		Meet with
		The undesirable;

		They achieve
		The future fate of
		Those who still have
		Terrible deeds.

		The world
		Has crowded to
		Worthy objects
		Of compassion.

		As such, you—
		The Conqueror—
		Have, out of
		This compassion,

		Turned your heart
		Away from peace,

		Without allowing
		Yourself to go
		Into nirvana.	



The colophon

[colophon.1]
		This presentation
		Has been related
		By the Buddhist monk
		Known as Chandrakirti.

		It has proceeded
		From that classical
		Commentary of
		The middle way,

		And is in accord with
		The traditional sources,
		And the personal advices.


[colopon.2]
		There is no presentation
		Of this teaching
		To be found in any
		Other than those.

		Just so, real masters
Should be sure
Of one thing:

The system
		That appears here

		Is one that
		You cannot find
		In any of the other.	


[colophon.3]
		They were frightened
		By the shade
		
		Of the expanse
		Of the ocean

		Of the mind
		Of Nagarjuna.

		And so individuals
		Took the beautiful system
		And discarded it off
		To a distance.

		But the flow
Of pure water
From that one
		Set in verse

		Opened the blooms
		Of a pure white
		Water lily,

		Whose buds had
		Been awaiting it.

		And with this
		Chandrakirti has now
		Fulfilled, perfectly,
		All the hopes.
		

[colophon.4]
		The profound idea
		Of suchness

		Which we have
		Finished explaining
		Can be frightening [f. 219a].

		There are individuals
		Who have, previous,
		Become highly accustomed,
		And did have
		Such realizations.

		Others may possess
		Vast learning,
		
		And yet still
		They would not
		Be able to grasp this.

		And thus it is that
		Any system where
		We see these ideas

		That people have
		Made up in
		Their own mind

		We note that they
		Are just the same
		As if they were following

		The scriptural traditions
		Of those who describe
		Some self-nature.

		As such,
		I would encourage you
		To discard that
		State of mind where

		You take some kind
		Of pleasure in
		The texts of those

		Who adhere
		To some other
		School of thought.


[colophon.5]
		Thus have I
		Enunciated that
		Beautiful system
		Of the Master,
		Nagarjuna.

		And by doing so,
		I have merit enough
		To stretch to the
		Very edges of
		Space itself.

		The sky of my mind
		Had been sent into
		The gloom of the
		Negative emotions.

		But now,
		In the midst,
		Has come a bright
		White light like
		
		A major star in
		The autumn heavens.

		Or else you could say
		That here is a mind
		Which resembles
		That fabulous jewel

		Which a cobra holds
		Embedded in their hood;

		And the acquisition of such
		Will allow the entire world
		To perceive suchness;

		And then may it happen
		That—with great speed—
		Every being completes
		Their journey to the level
		Of One Gone to Bliss.


[colophon.6]
This then completes Entering the Middle Way, an illumination of the ways of both the profound and the widespread.  It was composed by Master Chandrakirti, whose holy heart had long since been lost to that highest way.


[colophon.7]
He held a high level of knowledge that was never stolen away; and he possessed compassion as well.  He was known for sketching a cow that was about to give birth, and then milking real milk from it.  With this, he was able to stop others from believing that things are real.  This then is the one who completed this composition.



The original translators

[translators.1]
This was translated in the middle of the Kashmiri town known as Anupama, or “Beyond All Compare,” within the temple whose name is “Hidden Jewels.”  This was during the time of the Kashmiri king whose name was Aryadeva.


[translators.2]
The translation of the text was done according to the Sanskrit edition of the work circulating at that time in Kashmir.  The team that completed the translation consisted of the senior Indian cleric Tilaka, together with the master Tibetan translator, the Buddhist monk Patsab Nyima Drak.


[translators.3]
Later on, at the Ramoche Temple in the city of Lhasa, the senior Indian cleric by the name of Kanaka Varma and the same master Tibetan translator were able to review a copy of the Sanskrit text that had been circulating in the eastern part of Bactria.  This allowed them to complete an accurate revision of the Tibetan translation, and then finalize it through their efforts to teach it to their students.


[translators.4]
Why then do we see one colophon for the composition of the commentary itself, and then a shared colophon for the translation?  This is because the root text was translated once on its own, and then edited as part of a combined version of the commentary and the root text presented within it.











Je Tsongkapa’s
Outline of the Text



Je Tsongkapa’s Outline of the Text


I. MTSAN GYI DON,
The meaning of the title [folio 2b] [title]

II. ‘GYUR GYI PHYAG
The translator’s obeisance [f. 4a]
	
III. GZHUNG GI DON,
The meaning of the body of the text [f. 4a]

	A. BSTAN BCOS RTZOM PA LA ‘JUG PA’I THABS MCHOD PAR BRJOD PA,
The offering of praise, which functions as a means of initiating the composition of this classical commentary [f. 4a]

1. SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA SO SOR MA PHYE BAR BSTOD PA,
Singing the praises of great compassion without dividing out the components [f. 4a]

a. SNYING RJE BYANG SEMS KYI GTZO BO’I RGYUR BSTAN PA,
Describing how it is that compassion is the principal cause of a bodhisattva [f. 4b]

i. NYAN RANG GNYIS THUB DBANG LAS SKYES TSUL,
How it is that listeners & self-made buddhas are born from the Lords of the Able [f. 4b] [v. I.1a]

ii. SANGS RGYAS RNAMS BYANG SEMS LAS ‘KHRUNGS TSUL, [f. 7b]
How it is that Buddhas take their holy birth from bodhisattvas

iii. BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’I RGYU’I GTZO BO GSUM BSTAN PA, [f. 9b] [v. I.1b]
A description of the three principal causes of a bodhisattva

b. BYANG SEMS KYI RGYU GZHAN GNYIS KYI YANG RTZA BAR BSTAN PA, [f. 11b] [v. I.2]
Describing how it is that compassion is the very root of the other two causes of a bodhisattva as well

2. SNYING RJE CHEN PO LA SO SOR PHYE STE PHYAG ‘TSAL BA,
	[f. 13a]
Bowing down to great compassion while dividing out the components

a. SEMS CAN LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA, [f. 13a] [v. I.3]
Bowing down to the form of compassion which focuses upon living beings

b. CHOS DANG DMIGS PA MED PA LA DMIGS PA’I SNYING RJE LA PHYAG ‘TSAL BA, [f. 15a] [vv. I-4-5a]
Bowing down to that form of compassion which focuses upon things, and upon the way in which beings are not even there


B. BRTZAMS PA’I BSTAN BCOS KYI LUS DNGOS, [f. 18b]
The actual body of the commentary which is then composed

1. RGYU’I SA, [f. 18b]
A presentation of the levels which act as a cause

a. LUGS ‘DI’I LAM NYAMS SU LEN TSUL SPYIR BSTAN PA,
	[f. 18b]
A general discussion of how it is that we put the path of this system into practice

b. BYE BRAG TU SO SKYE’I SAR NYAMS SU LEN TSUL BSHAD PA, [f. 20a]
A more specific explanation of how we practice upon the levels of common beings

c. BYANG SEMS ‘PHAGS PA’I SA’I RNAM GZHAG BSTAN PA,
A presentation on the structure of the levels for realized beings who are bodhisattvas [f. 21a]

	i. SA BCU’I THUN MONG GI RNAM GZHAG, [f. 21a]
	A combined presentation of the ten levels

ii. SA SO SO’I RNAM GZHAG [f. 23b]
A separate presentation for each one of the ten levels

	a) RAB DGA’ SOGS SA LNGA BSHAD PA, [f. 23b]
An explanation of the five levels beginning with Perfect Happiness

i) SA DANG PO RAB TU DGA’ BA BSHAD PA,
An explanation of the first bodhisattva level, Perfect Happiness [f. 23b]


*  *  *


a1) KHYAD GZHI SA’I NGO BO MDOR BSTAN, [f. 23b]
A brief presentation of what it is which possesses a certain feature—that is, the level itself

b1) KHYAD CHOS SA’I YON TAN RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA, [f. 24b]
An expanded explanation of the feature which the level possesses—that is, specific high personal qualities

	a2) RANG GI RGYUD MDZES PAR BYED PA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA, [f. 24b]
A description of the high qualities where our being is made beautiful

	a3) YON TAN SO SOR PHYE STE BSHAD PA, [f. 24b]
	An explanation of these high qualities, made by
separating them out individually

a4) DON LDAN GYI MTSAN ‘THOB PA’I
YON TAN, [f. 24b] [v. I.5b]
The high quality where we earn a very significant name

b4) RIGS SU SKYE BA SOGS BZHI’I YON TAN,
	[f. 25a] [vv. I.6a, I.6b]
The high quality with the four characteristics
	that begin with taking birth into a royal family

c4) SA GONG MA GNON PA SOGS
GSUM GYI YON TAN [f. 26b] [v. I.7]
			The high quality with three characteristics,
				beginning with surpassing the levels before
			
		b3) YON TAN MDOR BSDUS TE BSTAN PA, [f. 26b]
		An explanation of the qualities by summarizing them

	b2) GZHAN GYI RGYUD ZIL GYIS GNON PA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA, [f. 27a]
	A description of the high quality where our being outshines those of others

a3) SA ‘DIR NYAN RANG RNAMS RIGS KYI SGO NAS ZIL GYIS GNON PA, [f. 27a] [v. I.8a]
How a bodhisattva at this level outshines the listeners & self-made buddhas, by virtue of the family to which they belong

b3) SA BDUN PAR NYAN RANG GNYIS BLO’I SGO NAS ZIL GYIS GNON PA, [f. 28b] [v. I.8b]
How, at the seventh bodhisattva level, the bodhisattva outshines listeners & self-made buddhas, by virtue of their state of mind

c3) DE LTAR GSUNGS PAS GRUB PA’I DON BSHAD PA, [f. 30b]
An explanation of the conclusion we can draw from statements to this effect.

a4) SA BCU PA’I MDOS NYAN RANG LA CHOS RANG BZHIN MED PAR RTOGS PA YOD PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 30b]
How the Sutra on the Ten Levels indicates that the listeners & self-made buddhas do possess the realization that things have no nature of their own

a5) ‘GREL PA MDZAD PA’I DGONGS PA GSAL BAR BSHAD PA, [f. 30b]
A clear explanation of what the author of the autocommentary actually had in mind

b5) DE NYID SPYOD ‘JUG GI LUGS SU’ANG BSTAN PA,
	[f. 32b]
A demonstration that the position accepted by the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life is just the same

b4) DE SGRUB PA’I KHUNGS BSTAN PA, [f. 36a]
A presentation of authentic sources which prove this point

	a5) THEG CHEN GYI MDO’I SHES BYED DGOD PA, [f. 36a]
	Presenting sutras of the greater way which prove this point

b5) BSTAN BCOS DANG THEG DMAN GYI MDO’I SHES BYED DGOD PA, [f. 38b]
Presenting classical commentaries and sutras of the lower way which prove the point

c4) DE LTAR BSTAN PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 42a]
A refutation of arguments concerning these presentations

a5) ‘GREL PA NAS BSHAD PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA,
	[f. 42a]
	The refutation of arguments covered in the autocommentary

	b5) DER MA BSHAD PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 44a]
	A refutation of arguments not covered there

c2) SA DANG POR LHAG PA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA, [f. 47b]
A description of the high quality where, at the first bodhisattva level,
we bring our practice to a higher level

		a3) SA DANG PO LA GNAS PA’I SBYIN PA BSHAD PA,
			[f. 47b] [v. I.9a, I.9b]
		An explanation of the giving practiced by a person who is at the first level

		b3) RTEN DMAN PA RNAMS KYI SBYIN PA BSHAD PA, [f. 48a]
		An explanation of the giving practiced by people of a lower type of being

			a4) SBYIN PAS ‘KHOR BA’I BDE BA ‘THOB PAR
BSTAN PA, [f. 48a] [v. I.10, v. I.11]
A description of how we reach happiness in the circle of pain, through the practice of giving

b4) SBYIN PAS MYANG ‘DAS KYI BDE BA ‘THOB PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 48b] [v. I.12]
A description of how we reach the happiness of nirvana, through the same practice

		c3) BYANG CHUB SEMS DPA’ RNAMS KYI SBYIN PA BSHAD PA,
			[f. 49a]
		An explanation of the giving practiced by bodhisattvas

a4) BYANG SEMS KYI SBYIN PA’I PHAN YON THUN MONG MA YIN PA BSTAN PA, [f. 49a] [v. I.13a]
A description of the unique type of giving practiced by a bodhisattva

b4) RTEN GNYIS KA LA SBYIN PA’I GTAM GTZO BOR BSTAN PA, [f. 49a] [v. I.13b]
A description of how the discussion of giving is primary for both types of people

c4) BYANG SEMS KYIS SBYIN PA’I TSE DGA’ BA JI ‘DRA BA ‘THOB PA BSTAN PA, [f. 49b] [v. I.14]
A description of the kind of happiness that a bodhisattva feels when they are giving

d4) BYANG SEMS KYIS LUS SBYIN PA LA SDUG BSNGAL YOD MED BSTAN PA, [f. 50a] [v. I.15]
A description of whether or not a bodhisattva feels pain when they give away their own body

		d3) SBYIN PA’I PHAR PHYIN GYI DBYE BA
BSTAN PA, [f. 51a] [v. 16a, v. 16b]
		A presentation of the divisions of the perfection of giving


*  *  *


c1) SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS 
	MJUG BSDU BA’O, [f. 52b] [v. I.17, chapter number]	
A concluding summary, accomplished through describing the high qualities of the level themselves.


*  *  *


ii) SA GNYIS PA DRI MA MED PA BSHAD PA, [f. 53a]
    An explanation of the second bodhisattva level, Immaculate

	a1) SA ‘DIR TSUL KHRIMS YONGS SU DAG PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 53a]
A presentation about how, at this level, ones ethical life is completely pure

	a2) SA ‘DIR TSUL KHRIMS PHUN SUM TSOGS PAR
BSTAN PA, [f. 53a] [v. II.1a]
A presentation about how, at this level, ones ethical life is truly excellent

b2) DE LA BRTEN NAS YON TAN YONGS SU DAG PAR BSTAN PA,
	[f. 53b] [v. II.1b]
A presentation of how, due to this ethical life, ones good qualities are totally pure

	c2) SA DANG PO LAS TSUL KHRIMS LHAG PAR
BSTAN PA, [f. 54a] [v. II.2]
A presentation of how ones ethical life, at this point, exceeds that of the first level

d2) TSUL KHRIMS YONGS SU DAG PA’I RGYU GZHAN BSTAN PA,
	[f. 54a] [v. II.3]
A presentation of additional causes that make our ethical life totally pure

	b1) TSUL KHRIMS KYI BSNGAGS PA BSTAN PA, [f. 55a]
A presentation of the praises of an ethical life

a3) SBYIN ‘BRAS BDE ‘GROR SPYOD PA TSUL KHRIMS LA RAG LAS PA, [f. 55a] [v. II.4a]
How it is that enjoying the fruits of our acts of giving in a higher rebirth depends upon our following an ethical way of life

b3) SBYIN ‘BRAS LA SKYE BA BRGYUD MAR SPYOD PA TSUL KHRIMS LA RAG LAS PA, [f. 55b] [v. II.4b]
How enjoying the fruits of these acts in a succession of lifetimes depends upon following this same way of life

c3) TSUL KHRIMS DANG BRAL NA NGAN ‘GRO LAS THAR PA SHIN TU DKA’ BAR BSTAN PA, [f. 55b] [v. II.5]
A presentation about how difficult it is to find freedom from the lower realms, if we lack an ethical way of life

d3) SBYIN PA’I GTAM GYI RJES SU TSUL KHRIMS KYI GTAM MDZAD PA’I RGYU MTSAN, [f. 56a] [v. II.6]
The reason why leading an ethical life is discussed after the discussion of giving

e3) MNGON MTHO DANG NGES LEGS GNYIS KA’I RGYUR TSUL KHRIMS BSNGAGS PA, [f. 57a] [v. II.7]
Singing the praises of an ethical life, as the cause that brings us higher states and definite good

c1) TSUL KHRIMS KYI MI MTHUN PHYOGS DANG MA ‘DRES PA’I DPE BSTAN PA, [f. 58a] [v. II.8]
The presentation of a metaphor to describe how—at this level—ones ethical life is beyond any adulteration by the things that could work against it

d1) TSUL KHRIMS KYI PHAR PHYIN GYI DBYE BA BSTAN PA, [f. 58b] [v. II.9]
A presentation of the divisions of the perfection of an ethical life

e1) SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS MJUG BSDU BA,
	[f. 58b] [v. II.10] [chapter number]
A concluding summary of this level, accomplished by describing its high qualities


*  *  *


iii) SA GSUM PA ‘OD BYED PA BSHAD PA, [f. 59a]
An explanation of the third bodhisattva level, Shining

	a1) KHYAD PAR GYI GZHI SA’I NGES TSIG [f. 59a] [v. III.1]
The literal meaning of the name of what possesses the quality we will describe—that is, the name of the bodhisattva level

b1) KHYAD PAR GYI CHOS SA’I YON TAN, [f. 59b]
The qualities we will describe—the high qualities of this level

	a2) SA ‘DIR BZOD PA LHAG PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 59b] [v. III.2, v. III.3]	
	An explanation of how, at this level, our patience is exceeding
	
b2) BZOD PA GZHAN JI LTAR BSTEN PA’I TSUL, [f. 60b]
How it is that others practice patience

	a3) KHONG KHRO BYA BAR MI RIGS PA, [f. 60b]
	An explanation of how wrong it is to allow ourselves to be angry

a4) DGOS PA MED CING NYES DMIGS CHE BAS KHONG KHRO BAR MI RIGS PA, [f. 60b] [v. III.4]
Showing how anger is wrong because it pointless, and causes great problems

b4) PHYIS KYI SDUG BSNGAL MI ‘DOD BA DANG GNOD LAN BYED PA GNYIS ‘GAL BAR BSTAN PA,
	[f. 61a] [v. III.5]
An explanation of how the desire to avoid future suffering and the desire to hurt someone back contradict one another

c4) SNGAR YUN RING BSAGS PA’I DGE BA ‘JOMS PAS KHONG KHRO BAR MI RIGS PA, [f. 61b]
How anger is wrong because it destroys the good deeds that we have accumulated for many years in the past

	a5) DKYUS KYI DON, [f. 61b] [v. III.6]
Explanation of the continuation of the previous thought

b5) ZHAR BYUNG GI DON
BSHAD PA, [f. 63b]
Explanation of an incidental point

d4) MI BZOD PA’I SKYON MANG PO BSAMS NAS KHONG KHRO DGAG PA, [f. 66a] [v. III.7a]
How we can stop anger by considering the main problems that it causes

	b3) BZOD PA BSTEN PAR RIGS PA, [f. 66a]
	An explanation of how right it is to practice patience

		a4) BZOD PA’I YON TAN MANG PO
BSAM PA, [f. 66a] [v. III7b-8]
		Considering the many good qualities of patience

b4) DON BSDUS TE BZOD PA BSTEN PAR GDAMS PA,
	[f. 66b] [III.9]
		A final summary where we are advised to rely upon patience

c2) BZOD PA’I PHAR PHYIN GYI DBYE BA, [f. 66b] [v. III.10]
The divisions of the perfection of patience

d2) SA ‘DIR ‘BYUNG BA’I DAG PA’I YON TAN
GZHAN BSTAN PA, [f. 66b] [v. III.11]
A description of other, very pure qualities that come at this level


c1) PHAR PHYIN DANG PO GSUM GYI KHYAD PAR GYI
CHOS, [f. 68b] [v. III.12]
Typical features of the first three perfections

d1) SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS
MJUG BSDU BA [f. 68b] [v. III.13] [chapter number]
A concluding summary of this level, accomplished by describing its high qualities


*  *  *


iv) SA BZHI PA ‘OD ‘PHRO BA BSHAD PA, [f. 69a]
An explanation of the fourth bodhisattva level, Radiance

	a1) SA ‘DIR BRTZON ‘GRUS LHAG PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 69a] [v. IV.1]
	A description of how, at this point, our practice of joyful effort becomes higher

b1) SA’I NGES PA’I TSIG BSTAN PA, [f. 69a] [v. IV.2a]
An explanation of the particular name used for this level

c1) SPANGS PA’I KHYAD PAR
BSTAN PA, [f. 70a] [v. IV.2b] [chapter number]
A description of what it is we rid ourselves of at this point


v) SA LNGA PA SBYANG DKA’ BA BSHAD PA, [f. 70b]
An explanation of the fifth bodhisattva level, Invincible

	a1) SA LNGA PA’I NGES PA’I TSIG BSHAD PA, [f. 70b] [v. V.1a]
	An explanation of the literal meaning of this level’s name

a2) BSAM GTAN LHAG CING BDEN PA LA
MKHAS PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 70b] [v. V.1b] [chapter number]
A description how, at this level, our practice of the perfection of concentration reaches a higher level—and we become masters on the subject of reality


*  *  *


b) SA DRUG PA MNGON DU GYUR PA BSHAD PA, [f. 72a]
An explanation of the sixth level—Direct Perception

i) SA’I NGES TSIG DANG SHER PHYIN LHAG PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 72a] [v. VI.1]
A presentation of the literal meaning of the level’s name, as well as a description of how we reach a higher degree of the perfection of wisdom at this level

ii) SHES RAB KYI PHAR PHYIN GYI BSNGAGS PA, [f. 73a] [v. VI.2]
A praise of this perfection

iii) ZAB MO RTEN ‘BYUNG GZIGS PA’I DE KHO NA NYID BSHAD PA, [f. 73b]
An explanation of suchness for those who see the subtle form of creation in dependence

a1) ZAB MO’I DON BSHAD PAR DAM BCA’ BA, [f. 73b] [v. VI. 3]
A pledge to explain that most profound object

b1) ZAB MO’I DON BSHAD PA’I SNOD
NGOS BZUNG BA, [f. 75a] [v. VI.4-5a]
Identifying the kind of person who is a worthy vessel for an explanation of the profound

c1) DE LA BSHAD NA YON TAN ‘BYUNG TSUL, [f. 76b] [v. VI.5b-7a]
What kinds of good qualities this person develops, once they have received this explanation

d1) SNOD LDAN GYI GANG ZAG LA NYAN PAR
BSKUL BA, [f. 78a] [v. VI.7b]
Words urging those who may be a worthy vessel to listen well to this teaching

e1) RTEN ‘BYUNG GI DE NYID JI LTAR BSHAD PA’I TSUL, [f. 79b]
An explanation of how we explain the true nature of dependent events

	a2) YANG DAG PA’I DON LUNG GIS BSTAN PA’I TSUL, [f. 79b]
	The way in which pure reality is presented in scripture

a3) LUNG LAS GSUNGS PA’I TSUL DGOD PA, [79b]
Setting forth the different ways in which pure reality is presented in scripture

a4) DE KHO NA NYID SHES PA’I MI MTHUN PHYOGS NGOS GZUNG BA, [80a]
Identifying things that can work against an understanding of suchness

a5) DBU MA RANG RGYUD PA’I LUGS KYI BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS GZUNG BA, [81b]
How the system of the Independent section of the Middle Way identifies the way in which we hold on to things as being real

a6) BDEN GRUB DANG BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS GZUNG BA, [81b]
Their identification of “real existence,” and how we hold on to it

a7) ‘JIG RTEN PA LA LTOS PA’I BDEN RDZUN SGYU MA’I DPES BSTAN PA, [83a]
A presentation of the metaphor of a magician, to demonstrate from a worldly point of view the difference between what is real and what is false

a8) DPE DE DON LA SBYAR NAS BSHAD PA, [84a]
How we relate this metaphor to actual things

a7) DBU MA THAL ‘GYUR BA’I LUGS KYI BDEN ‘DZIN NGOS GZUNG BA, [85b]
How the system of the Consequence section of the Middle Way identifies the way in which we hold on to things as being real

a8) CHOS RNAMS RTOG PA’I DBANG GIS ‘JOG TSUL, [85b]
How it is that things are established by force of ideas

b8) DE LAS BZLOG STE ‘DZIN PA’I BDEN ‘DZIN BSTAN PA, [88b]
A presentation of what it is to hold things as real: as the opposite of something created by ideas


	b2) LUNG GI DON DE RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA, [90b]
	Confirming the content of these scriptures through reasoning

				a3) CHOS KYI BDAG MED RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA, [90b]
Using reasoning to prove that things have no self-nature

a4) MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA BDEN PA GNYIS KAR DGAG PA, [90b]
Denying—with regard to both realities—that things could start in any of four possible ways

a5) RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA MED PA’I DAM BCA’ BZHAG PA, [90b] [v. VI.8a]
Setting forth our assertion that there is no such thing as something starting through some nature of its own

b5) DE RIGS PAS SGRUB PA’I SGRUB BYED BSTAN PA, [93b]
Presenting the proofs which establish this assertion through the use of logic


*  *  *


a4) BDAG SKYE DGAG PA, [93b]
Denying that things could grow from themselves

	a5) ‘GREL PA MDZAD PA’I RIGS PAS DGAG PA, [93b]
Accomplishing the denial by using the logic employed by the author of the autocommentary

a6) DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PAR ‘DOD PA’I GRUB MTHA’ MKHAN GYI LUGS DGAG PA, [93b]
Denying the system of those who believe they have perceived some actual nature

a7) RANG DANG NGO BO GCIG PA’I RGYU LAS SKYE BA DGAG PA, [93b]
A denial that something could grow from a cause which was such that to be that cause was to be what had grown from it

a8) NGO BO GCIG PA’I RGYU LAS SKYE NA DON MED DU THAL BA, [93b] [v. VI.8b]
A demonstration that it would be meaningless for a result to grow from a cause that was such that to be the cause were to be the result

b8) NGO BO GCIG PA LAS SKYE NA RIGS PA DANG ‘GAL BA, [95a] [v. VI.8c-9a] [v. VI.9b]
Explaining that it would contradict logic if a result were to grow from a cause that were such that to be the cause were to be the result

c8) DE DAG GI NYES SPONG GI LAN
DGAG PA, [95a] [v. VI.9c]
Refuting replies which attempt to deny these problems

b7) RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU GNYIS NGO BO GCIG PA DGAG PA, [95b]
A denial that a cause could at any rate be such that to be it were to be its result
	
a8) SA MYUG GNYIS LA DBYIBS SOGS THA DAD MED PAR THAL BAS DGAG [95b] [v. VI.10a]
Denying such a possibility by showing how the pair of the seed and the sprout could then never have different shapes, and so on

b8) DE’I NYES SPONG GI LAN DGAG [96a] [v. VI.10b]
Countering a response which attempts to avoid this problem

c8) GNAS SKABS GNYIS KYI RE RER GNYIS KA ‘DZIN MI ‘DZIN MTSUNGS PAR THAL BAS DGAG PA, [96a] [v. VI.11]
Denying this possibility by showing how the it would then have to be the same whether we held or didn’t hold to both, as individuals at two separate stages


b6) GRUB MTHAS BLO MA BSGYUR BA’I THA SNYAD DU YANG MED PAR BSTAN PA, [96b] [v. VI.12a]
Demonstrating that things could not be said to grow from themselves even in the parlance of those who have not been influenced by any particular school of philosophy

c6) DE LTAR BKAG PA RNAMS KYI DON BSDU BA, [96b] [v. VI.12b]
A summary of these denials
		
b5) RTZA BA SHES RAB KYI RIGS PAS
DGAG PA, [97a] [v. VI.13]
Accomplishing the denial by using the logic employed in Wisdom

b4) GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA, [97b]
Denying that things could grow from something other than themselves

a5) PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA, [97b]
Stating the position of others with whom we disagree

b5) LUGS DE DGAG PA’O, [98b]
	How we disprove this position

		a6) GZHAN SKYE ‘DOD PA’I PHYOGS SPYIR DGAG PA, [98b]
A general denial of schools which accept that something can grow from something else

a7) GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA DNGOS, [98b]
The actual denial of the idea that things could grow from something other than themselves

a8) GZHAN SKYE SPYIR DGAG PA, [99a]
A general denial that things could grow from something other than themselves

a9) HA CANG THAL BAS DGAG [99a]
Denying this kind of growth because it would be absurd

a10) HA CANG THAL BA
DNGOS, [99a] [v. VI.14]
The actual demonstration of absurdity

b10) DE DAG GI MTHA’ DPYAD PA, [f. 99b]
A logical examination of the points

a11) GZHAN SKYE LA HA CANG THAL BA ‘JUG PA’I RGYU MTSAN, [99b]
The reason why the idea that things could grow from something else leads to the absurdity

b11) THAL BA LAS BZLOG PA KHAS LEN PA YI ‘GAL BA, [101a]
The contradiction that arises from accepting the opposite of the absurdity

2k) SKYON SPONG GI LAN DGAG PA,
Denying a response which attempts to avoid the problem

1l) SKYON SPONG GI LAN, [102a] [v. VI.15]
A presentation of the response which attempts to avoid the problem

2l) LAN DE DGAG PA, [102b] [v. VI.16]
Denying this response


b9) GZHAN SKYE BYE BRAG TU DGAG PA, [103b]
A more particular denial that things could grow from something other than themselves

a10) RGYU ‘BRAS SNGA PHYI BA LA GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA, [103b]

Denying that things could grow from something other than themselves, in the case of a cause and its effect which are successive

	a11) DNGOS KYI DON, [103b] [v. VI.17]

	The actual point

b11) BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [103b] [v. VI.18] [v. VI.19]

	Refuting attempted rebuttal of our denial

b10) RGYU ‘BRAS DUS MNYAM PA LA GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA, [105b] [v. VI.20]

Denying that things could grow from something other than themselves, in a case where cause & effect were simultaneous

c9) ‘BRAS BU LA MU BZHIR DPYAD NAS GZHAN SKYE DGAG PA’O, [106a]
A denial that things could grow from something other than  themselves accomplished by examining four possible permutations [v. VI.21]

b8) BKAG PA LA ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA SPANG BA, [106a]
Overcoming objections which say that the denial that things could grow from something other than themselves in any way contradicts the beliefs of the everyday world

a9) ‘JIG RTEN GYI GRAGS PAS GZHAN SKYE KHAS BLANGS NAS ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA SPANG BA, [106a]
Overcoming objections relating to the everyday world which say that—in the conventions of the world—the idea that things grow from something other than themselves is accepted

a10) ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PA’I
RTZOD PA, [106a] [v. VI.22]
Arguments which present how we’ve contradicted the beliefs of the everyday world

b10) DES MI GNOD PA’I LAN BSTAN PA, [106b]
The presentation of a reply to these arguments, which shows how we have not in fact contradicted the beliefs of the everyday world

Includes: BDEN PA GNYIS KYI RNAM DBYE BSTAN PA [107a]:

a11) BDEN PA GNYIS KYI SPYI’I RNAM GZHAG, [107a]
A general presentation of the two realities

a12) BDEN GNYIS SU DBYE BAS CHOS RNAMS LA NGO BO GNYIS GNYIS YOD PAR BRJOD PA, [107a] [v. VI.23]
A statement about how all objects each possess two different natures, given the division into two realities

b12) BDEN GNYIS KYI RNAM BZHAG GZHAN BSTAN PA, [108b]
A description of other ways in which the two realities are set forth

c12) ‘JIG RTEN LA BLTOS TE KUN RDZOB KYI DBYE BA BSHAD PA, [111b] [v. VI.24] [v. VI.25]
An explanation of the divisions of deceptive reality, relative to the everyday world

d12) ZHEN YUL LA ‘KHRUL BA’I ZHEN YUL THA SNYAD DU YANG MED PAR BSTAN PA, [113b] [v. VI.26]
Demonstrating that—when we are mistaken towards the object we think we see—this object that we believe in does not even exist nominally

b11) SKABS KYI DON LA SBYAR BA, [f. 114a] [v. VI.27]
How to apply this presentation to the present topic

c11) BDEN GNYIS SO SO’I NGO BO BSHAD PA, [114a]
A separate explanation of the nature of each of the two realities

		a12) KUN RDZOB KYI BDEN PA BSHAD PA, [114a]
		An explanation of deceptive reality

a13) KUN RDZOB PA GANG GI NGOR BDEN LA GANG GI NGOR MI BDEN PA, [114a]
An examination of the state of mind to which deceptive reality is real, and the state of mind to which it is not real

				a14) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 114b] [v. VI.28]
				A description of the actual point

b14) NYON MONGS KYI RNAM GZHAG THUN MONG MA YIN PA BSHAD PA, [117a]
An explanation of this unique presentation of the negative emotions

b13) KUN RDZOB TZAM DE GANG ZAG GSUM LA SNANG BA DANG MI SNANG BA’I TSUL, [120a]
An examination of which of the three types of individuals basic deception can appear to, or not appear

c13) SO SKYE DANG ‘PHAGS PA LA LTOS TE DON DAM PA DANG KUN RDZOB TU ‘GYUR TSUL, [121b]
A description of the way in which things can become either ultimate or deceptive, relative to a normal person, or a realized being


		b12) DON DAM PA’I BDEN PA BSHAD PA, [122a]
		An explanation of that reality which is ultimate

			a13) RTZA BA’I TSIG DON BSHAD PA, [122a] [v. VI.29]
			An explanation of the words of the root text at this point

			b13) DE LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [123a]
			Refutation of argument concerning their meaning

				Includes:

a14) DON DAM BDEN PA’I SHES BYA THAMS CAD MKHYEN TSUL, [123b]
How Buddhas know all existing objects of ultimate reality

b14) KUN RDZOB BDEN PA’I SHES BYA THAMS CAD MKHYEN TSUL, [123b]
How Buddhas know all existing objects of deceptive reality

d11) BKAG PA LA ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PA LA
GNOD BYED BSTAN PA, [126b] [vv. VI.30-31a]

A demonstration that there are contradictions in the idea that our denial of growth from something other is contradicted by the perceptions of the world

e11) ‘JIG RTEN GYIS GNOD PA’I GNOD TSUL BSTAN PA, [127a] [v. VI.31b]
A presentation on the way in which the perceptions of the world would in fact be contradicted


*  *  *


b9) ‘JIG RTEN GYI THA SNYAD DU YANG GZHAN SKYE MED PAS ‘JIG RTEN GYI GNOD PA SPANG BA, [127b] [v. VI.32]
Overcoming objections relating to the everyday world which say that there is no growth of things from something other than themselves, even in the parlance of the world

c8) DE LTAR BKAG PA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA, [128b] [v. VI.33]	
Demonstrating the advantages of the denial

d8) RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA ‘GAR YANG MED PAR BSTAN PA, [130a]
Demonstrating that there is no possible instance where it would be correct to say that things could grow through any nature of their own

	a9) RANG GI MTSAN NYID KYIS GRUB PA YOD PAR
‘DOD PA DGAG PA, [130a]
	Denying the belief that things could exist by definition

a10) ‘PHAGS PA’I MNYAM GZHAG DNGOS PO’I
	‘JIG RGYUR THAL BAS DGAG [130a] [v. VI.34]
Making our denial by showing that
the deep meditation of a realized being
would then have to act as a cause
for the destruction of the entity

b10) THA SNYAD BDEN PA RIGS PAS DPYAD
	BZOD DU THAL BAS DGAG [132a] [v. VI.35]
Making the denial by demonstrating that
it would have to be the case that
nominal reality could stand up
under logical analysis

c10) DON DAM PA’I SKYE BA MI KHEGS PAR
THAL BAS DGAG PA [134a] [v. VI.36]
Making the same denial by showing that, in the
same case, we could never deny
that things started in any ultimate way

b9) DE LTAR BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA 
SPANG BA [135b] [vv. VI.37-38a]
Disproving any argument against this denial


e8) BDEN PA GNYIS CHAR DU’ANG RANG BZHIN GYIS SKYE BA BKAG PA’I YON TAN BSTAN PA, [138a]
Demonstrating the advantages of denying that things could grow through any nature of their own, relative to both forms of reality

	a9) RTAG CHAD KYI LTA BA SPANG SLA BA’I 
YON TAN, [138a] [v. VI.38b]
The advantage that both the views that things could never change, or that they could simply discontinue, are thus easily prevented

b9) LAS ‘BRAS KYI ‘BREL BA CHES ‘THAD PA’I YON TAN, [138b]
The advantage of showing that the connection between karma and its consequences is eminently correct.

a10) RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA MI ‘DOD PA LA KUN GZHI SOGS KHAS BLANG MI DGOS PAR BSTAN PA, [138b]
A demonstration that it is not the case that if we deny that things could exist through any nature of their own, we must then accept things like foundations consciousness

	a11) MTSAMS SBYOR GYI GZHUNG
BSHAD PA, [138b]
						Explaining that part of the text which provides
							a segue here

						b11) RTZA BA’I TSIG DON
BSHAD PA, [140a] [VI.39]
						Explaining the words of the root text

						c11) DE LAS ‘PHROS PA’I DON
BSHAD PA, [142a]
						Explaining additional points that those
							issues themselves raise

							a12) ‘GAG PA RANG BZHIN GYIS
								MED PA KUN GZHI KHAS
								MI LEN PA’I RGYU MTSAN DU
								‘GRO TSUL, [142a]
							The way in which the fact that the
								stopping here does not exist
								through any nature of its own
								can actually end up serving as a
								reason not to accept the concept
								of foundation consciousness
							
							b12) KUN GZHI KHAS MI LEN KYANG
								BAG CHAGS KYI GZHI
								‘JOG PA, [143b]
							How to posit a foundation for deep
								seeds even if we don’t accept
								foundation consciousness

b11) LAS ‘GAGS PA LAS ‘BRAS BU ‘BYUNG BA’I DPE BSTAN PA, [144b] [v. VI.40]
The presentation of a metaphor to illustrate how a karmic consequence can come from the karma itself having stopped

c11) DE LTAR BSTAN PA LA RTZOD PA
SPANG BA [f. 146b]
					Disproving any debate that may arise about
this presentation

a12) SNAM SMIN THUG MED DU ‘BYIN PA’I
	RTZOD PA SPANG BA,
[f. 146b] [vv. VI.41, VI.42]
Disproving debate which argues that
	never-ending ripenings would be
	give forth

b12) KUN GZHI YOD PAR GSUNGS PA’I
	LUNG DANG ‘GAL BA’I RTZOD PA
SPANG BA, [f. 147b]
						Disproving debate which argues that
							our position contradicts scriptural
							statements that a foundation
consciousness does exist


*  *  *


a13) LUNG ‘GAL SPONG BA’I TSIG DON DNGOS, [f. 147b] [v. VI.43]
A presentation of the actual meaning of the wording which denies that we
contradict scripture

b13) YID SHES LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I KUN GZHI BSHAD
MA BSHAD KYI TSUL, [f. 149a]
The way in which a foundation consciousness essentially separate from
consciousness of the thought is either explained, or not explained

c13) DGONGS PA’I DBANG GIS GSUNGS PA’I DPE BSTAN PA [f. 151a] [v. VI.44]
The presentation of a metaphor to demonstrate that statements in this regard
were only figurative


*  *  *


b6) SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS BYE BRAG TU DGAG PA, [f. 152a]
A more specific denial of the explanation of this point by the Mind Only School

	a7) PHYI ROL MED PA’I SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS
GRUB PA DGAG [f. 152a]
			A denial that the understanding that there are no outer objects
could ever exist through some nature of its own

a8) GZHAN LUGS BRJOD PA, [f. 152a]
[vv. VI.45, VI.46, VI.47]
Describing the position that others take

b8) LUGS DE DGAG PA, [f. 155b]
Denying that position

	a9) DGAG PA RGYAS PAR BRJOD PA, [f. 155b]
					An expanded description of our denial

						a10) PHYI ROL MED PA’I SHES PA RANG
BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I
DPE DGAG [f. 155b]
						Denying a metaphor which is meant to
show that awareness where there
are no outer objects could exist
through some nature of its own


* * *


a11) RMI LAM GYI DPE DGAG PA, [f. 155b]
Denying the metaphor of a dream

a12) RMI LAM GYI DPES SHES PA RANG BZHIN GYIS YOD PA
MI ‘GRUB PA, [f. 155b] [vv. VI.48, VI.49]
How it is that the metaphor of a dream fails to establish that
awareness exists through some nature of its own

b12) RMI LAM GYI DPES SAD DUS SU PHYI ROL MED PA
MI ‘GRUB PA, [f. 157a] [vv. VI.50, VI.51, VI.52a]
How it is that the metaphor of a dream fails to establish
the idea that, when we awake, there are no outer objects

c12) RMI LAM GYI DPES DNGOS PO THAMS CAD BRDZUN PAR
‘GRUB PA, [f. 159a] [v. VI.52b, v. VI.53]
Establishing—through the metaphor of a dream—that all entities
are deceptive

b11) SKRA SHAD MTHONG BA’I DPE DGAG PA, [f. 160a] [vv. VI.54, VI.55] 
Denying the metaphor of seeing a strand of hair


*  *  *


b10) BAG CHAGS KYI NUS PA LAS DON GYIS
STONG PA’I SHES PA SKYE BA’I
DON DGAG [f. 160b]
Denying the referent of the metaphor in
a case where awareness arises from
the power of a deep seed, and
is empty of the referent


*  *  *

a11) BAG CHAGS SMIN MA SMIN NYID LAS DON SNANG GI RNAM SHES
SKYE BA DANG MI SKYE BA DGAG PA, [f. 160b]
Denying that an awareness that takes on the image of the object and which
comes from either the ripening or the lack of ripening of a deep seed
could ever grow, or not grow

a12) GZHAN LUGS BRJOD PA, [f. 160b] [v. VI.56a]
A presentation of the position of the opponent

b12) LUGS DE DGAG PA,
A denial of this position [f. 161a]

a13) DA LTAR BA LA NUS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA
DGAG [f. 161a] [vv. VI.56b, VI.57a]
		A denial that the present could possess a potential that existed
through some nature of its own

b13) MA ‘ONGS PA’I NUS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA
DGAG [f. 161b] [vv. VI.57b, VI.58]
A denial that the potential of the future could exist through
some nature of its own

c13) ‘DAS PA LA NUS PA RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA
DGAG PA, [f. 162b] [vv. VI.59, VI.60, VI.61]
A denial that the potential of the past could exist through
some nature of its own

b11) SLAR YANG PHYI ROL MED PAR RNAM SHES YOD TSUL BRJOD PA
DGAG PA, [f. 164a]
Once more denying the description of how there could be an awareness,
in the absence of outer objects

a12) GZHAN GYI LUGS BRJOD PA, [f. 164a] [vv. VI.62, VI.63, VI.64]
Stating the position of the opponent

b12) LUGS DE DGAG PA, [f. 165a] [vv. VI.65, VI.66, VI.67, VI.68a] 
Denying that position


c11) SEMS TZAM GYI LUGS BKAG PA LA LUNG GI GNOD PA MED PAR
BSTAN PA, [f. 166a] [v. VI.68b]
Showing how there is no problem from scripture when we deny the system
of the Mind Only



*  *  *


c10) DE LTAR BKAG PA DANG MI SDUG PA SGOM PA GNYIS MI ‘GAL BAR
BSTAN PA [f. 168b] [vv. VI.69,
VI.70, VI.71a]
A demonstration that there is no contradiction
between this particular denial, and
the meditation on the repulsive


b9) DE LTAR BKAG PA’I MJUG BSDU
BA, [f. 171a] [v. VI.71b]
A summary of just such a denial


b7) GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA’I
SGRUB BYED TSAD MA DGAG [f. 171a]
Denying the accurate perception which is supposed to prove
that dominated things exist through some nature
of their own

a8) GZHAN DBANG GI SGRUB BYED RANG RIG
DGAG PA, [f. 171a]
				A denial of apperception, which is used
to establish dominated entities

a9) GZHAN DBANG GI SGRUB BYED DRIS NAS
DE MI ‘THAD PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 171a]
[vv. VI.72, VI.73a]
					A request for proof to substantiate the existence
of dominated entities, and then a demonstration
that the attempted proof is incorrect

b9) DE ‘THAD PA’I GZHAN GYI LAN DGAG
PA, [f. 172b]
A denial of the response by others that the proof
is indeed correct

a10) GZHAN GYI LUGS BRJOD PA, [f. 172b]
A statement of the position that others take

b10) LUGS DE DGAG PA, [f. 174b]
A denial of that position


*  *  *


a11) GZHAN LUGS DGAG PA DNGOS, [f. 174b] [vv. VI.73b, VI.74]
The denial of the others’ position itself

b11) RANG LUGS LA RANG RIG MED KYANG DRAN PA SKYE BA’I TSUL, [f. 176a]
An explanation of how—according to our own system—a memory can still arise, even in the absence of apperception

a12) GZHUNG ‘DI NYID NAS BSHAD PA’I LUGS, [f. 176a] [VI.75]
The presentation on this topic as it is made in the current text

b12) GZHUNG GZHAN NAS BSHAD PA’I LUGS, [f. 177a]
The presentation on this topic as it is made in other classical texts


b11) DE LTAR BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG PA [f. 178a]
Responding to attempted rebuttal of this explanation

a12) MNGON SUM GYI TSAD MA GZHAN DANG RJES DPAG LA
RTZOD PA SPANG BA [f. 178a]
Rejecting rebuttal about another direct, accurate perception; and a 
deductive form of the same

b12) YID SHES GZHAN GYI RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 180a]
Rejecting rebuttal concerning another consciousness of the thoughts


*  *  *

c9) RIGS PA GZHAN GYIS KYANG RANG RIG
MI ‘THAD PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 182b] 
[v. VI.76]
A demonstration that apperception is illogical
even according to other proofs

c9) GZHAN DBANG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA
MO GSHAM KYI BU DANG MTSUNGS
PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 183a, v. VI.77]
Establishing that dominated entities which existed
through some nature of their own would be
the equivalent of the child of a barren woman

b8) SEMS TZAM PA’I LUGS BDEN PA GNYIS CHAR
LAS NYAMS PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 183b, v. VI.78]
A demonstration that the Mind Only system fails
from the viewpoint of both of the realities

c8) DES NA KLU SGRUB KYI LUGS KHO NA’I 
RJES SU ‘BRANG BAR RIGS PA, [f. 184a,
vv. VI.79, VI.80]
A description of how—therefore—it is appropriate
to follow the system of Arya Nagarjuna, exclusively

d8) GZHAN DBANG DANG ‘JIG RTEN PA’I THA
SNYAD ‘GOG PA GNYIS MI MTSUNGS 
PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 186b, vv. VI.81, VI.82, VI.83]
Showing that denying dominated entities and
denying the verbiage of the world are not equivalent


c7) SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA’I TZAM GYI SGRAS
PHYI DON ‘GOG PA MIN PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 188b]
A demonstration that the word “only” in the expression
“Mind Only” is not meant to deny outer objects

a8) SA BCU PA LAS, SEMS TZAM DU GSUNGS PA’I
DGONGS PA BSHAD PA, [f. 188b]
				An explanation of how the intent of the term “mind only”
is described in The Ten Levels

a9) TZAM GYI SGRAS PHYI ROL MI ‘GOG PA
SA BCU PA’I LUNG GIS BSGRUB PA, [f. 188b,
v. VI.84]
					Showing how a citation from The Ten Levels supports
the idea that the word “only” is not meant
to deny outer objects

b9) DON DE NYID MDO GZHAN GYIS KYANG
BSGRUB PA, [f. 189b, vv. VI.85, VI.86]
Demonstrating how this very same point is made
in other sutras as well

c9) TZAM GYI SGRAS SEMS GTZO BO NYID DU
BSGRUB PA, [f. 190b, vv. VI.87, VI.88, VI.89,
VI.90]
Establishing that the intent of the word “only”
is to say only that the mind is the primary thing

b8) PHYI ROL DANG NANG GI SEMS GNYIS
YOD MED MTSUNGS PAR BSTAN PA,
[f. 193a, vv. VI.91, VI.92, VI.93]
				A demonstration that outside objects, and the inner mind,
are equivalent in either existing or not existing

c8) LANG KAR GSHEGS PA LAS, SEMS TZAM DU
GSUNGS PA’I DGONGS PA BSHAD PA, [f. 194b]
				An explanation of how the intent of “mind only” is
described in A Journey to Langka

a9) PHYI ROL MED PA’I SEMS TZAM DU
GSUNGS PA DRANG DON DU 
BSTAN PA, [f. 194b]
A demonstration that the statement that things
were mind only, without anything
on the outside, was meant figuratively

a10) DRANG DON DU LUNG GIS
BSTAN PA, [f. 194b]
Showing how scripture takes this statement
as figurative

a11) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 194b,
vv. VI.94, VI.95a]
The actual point to be made

a12) DE ‘DRA BA’I MDO
GZHAN YANG DRANG
DON DU BSTAN PA, [f. 195b,
v. VI.95b]
Showing how other sutras should
	be taken figuratively as well

b11) DRANG DON DU RIGS PAS 
BSTAN PA, [f. 199a, v. VI.96]
Showing how logic takes the statement
	as figurative

b10) MDO’I DRANG NGES KYI DON
RTOGS PA’I THABS BSTAN PA, [f. 199b,
v. VI.97]
Showing the way in which we can understand
which points in sutra are meant
figuratively, and which meant literally


c7) GNYIS KA LAS SKYE BA DGAG PA, [f. 201b, v. VI.98]
Denying that things could grow both from themselves and from something other than themselves

d7) RGYU MED PAR SKYE BA DGAG, [f. 202b, vv. VI.99, VI.100, VI.101, VI.102, VI.103]
Denying that things could grow without any cause at all


*  *  *


c5) MTHA’ BZHI’I SKYE BA BKAG PAS GRUB PA’I DON, [f. 205b, v. VI.104a]
The point we arrive at, by denying that things could start in any of these four different ways

b4) DE LTAR BKAG PA LA RTZOD PA SPANG BA,
	[f. 208b]
Refuting debate about this denial

a5) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 208b, vv. VI.104b, 	VI.105, VI.106, VI.107, VI.108, VI.109,
VI.110]
						The actual point

	b5) DE’I DON BSDUS TE BSTAN PA, [f. 208b,
		vv. VI.111, VI.112, VI.113]
	A summary presentation

c4) RTEN ‘BYUNG GI SKYE BA NYID KYIS MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI LOG RTOG ‘GOG TSUL, [f. 210a,
	vv. VI.114, VI.115, VI.116]
An explanation of how the concept that things start in dependence prevents mistaken ideas where we hold to extremes

d4) RIGS PAS DPYAD PA BYAS PA’I ‘BRAS BU NGOS GZUNG BA, [f. 212a, vv. VI.117, VI.118, VI.119]
Identifying the fruits we derive from having undertaken this logical examination

				b3) GANG ZAG GI BDAG MED RIGS PAS BSGRUB PA
					[f. 214b]
Using reasoning to prove that the person has no self-nature

a4) THAR ‘DOD KYIS THOG MAR BDAG RANG
BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA NYID DGAG DGOS
PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 214b, v. VI.120]
Showing how those who wish to achieve freedom
need, before anything else, to deny that the self
is something that could exist through any 
nature of its own

b4) BDAG DANG BDAG GI BA GNYIS RANG BZHIN
GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA’I TSUL, [f. 216a]
How it is that we deny the idea that either me or mine
could exist through any nature of their own

a5) BDAG RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA
DGAG PA, [f. 216a]
						Denying that the self could exist through
any nature of its own

*  *  *


a6) GZHAN SDES BTAGS PA’I PHUNG PO LAS NGO BO THA DAD PA’I
BDAG DGAG [f. 216a]
Denying the position concocted by other groups, who believe that there is a self
which could exist which was essentially separate from the parts to the person

a7) PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA, [f. 216a]
A statement of the position that the others take

	a8) GRANGS CAN GYI LUGS BRJOD PA, [f. 216a, v. VI.121a]
	Describing the system of the Numerists

	b8) BYE BRAG PA LA SOGS PA’I LUGS BRJOD PA, [f. 217b, v. VI.121b]
	Describing the system of the Detailers and so on

b7) LUGS DE DGAG PA, [f. 218b, vv. VI.122, VI.123, VI.124, VI.125]
Disproving that position

b6) RANG SDES BTAGS PA’I PHUNG PO NYID BDAG TU ‘DOD PA DGAG [f. 220a]
Denying the position concocted by some of our own groups, who believe that the
parts to the person themselves represent the self

a7) PHUNG PO BDAG TU ‘DOD PA LA GNOD BYED BSTAN PA, [f. 220a]
A presentation of problems with the position that the parts to the person
constitute the self

a8) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 220a]
The actual point

	a9) PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA, [f. 220a, v. VI.126]
	A statement of the other side’s position

b9) LUGS DE DGAG PA, [f. 221a, vv. VI.127, VI.128]
A denial of that particular position

b8) SKYON SPONG GI LAN DGAG PA, [f. 222b, VI.129a]
Refuting the answer, where the other side attempts to deny
the problems we’ve raised

b7) DE LTAR ‘DOD PAR MI RIGS PA’I SGRUB BYED BSTAN PA, [f. 223a,
	v. VI.129b]
A presentation of support for saying that this kind of belief is incorrect

c7) PHUNG PO BDAG TU SMRA BA LA GNOD BYED GZHAN BSTAN PA,
	[f. 223b, vv. VI.130, VI.131]
A presentation of other problems with saying that the parts to the person
are the self

d7) PHUNG PO BDAG TU GSUNGS PA SOGS KYI DGONGS PA 
BSHAD PA, [f. 225a]
An explanation of the actual intent behind statements that the parts to the
person are the self, and so on

a8) BDAG TU GANG LTA BA THAMS CAD PHUNG PO KHO NA LA
LTA PAR GSUNGS PA’I DON BSHAD PA, [f. 225a]
		An explanation of the statement that all cases of viewing a self are
viewing nothing but the parts to the person

a9) LUNG GI DGONGS PA DGAG BYA GCOD PA’I DGAG
PHYOGS NAS YIN PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 225b, vv. VI.132,
VI.133]
A demonstration that the intent of the scriptural reference is meant
in a negative connotation, where we are eliminating what
we deny

b9) SGRUB PHYOGS NAS YIN DU CHUG KYANG PHUNG PO
BDAG TU STON PA MIN PA, [f. 226b, v. VI.134]
How this reference is not saying that the parts to the person are
a self, even if we allow that the reference was meant
in a positive sense

c9) DE DAG LA GZHAN GYI RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 227a,
	v. VI.135a]
Refuting additional argument on these points

b8) MDO GZHAN LA BRTEN NAS PHUNG PO TSOGS TZAM
BDAG MIN PAR BSHAD PA, [f. 227b, v. VI.135b]
		Relying on other sutras to explain how the simple collection of the
parts to the person cannot be a self

c8) PHUNG PO TSOGS PA TZAM GYI DBYIBS KYI BKOD PA 
BDAG YIN PA DGAG PA, [f. 228a, v. VI.136]
		A denial that the outline of the simple collection of the parts to
the person could be a self

d8) PHUNG PO TSOGS TZAM BDAG TU ‘DOD PA LA GNOD BYED
GZHAN BSTAN PA, [f. 228b, v. VI.137]
		A demonstration of other problems with the position that the
simple collection of the parts to the person could be a self

e8) THUB PAS BDAG DE KHAMS DRUG LA SOGS PA LA BRTEN NAS
BTAGS PAR GSUNGS PA, [f. 229b, vv. VI.138, VI.139]
		A description of how the Able Ones have stated that the self is
merely something labeled upon the basis of things like
the six elements

e7) GZHAN GYI LUGS ‘BREL MED DU BSTAN PA, [f. 230b, vv. VI.140, VI.141]
A demonstration that the position of others here is irrelevant to the case

c6) DE GNYIS KYI LHAG MA’I PHYOGS RTEN DANG BRTEN PA SOGS GSUM 
DGAG [f. 231b]
Denying positions other than these two, which themselves involve three ideas
including one about the basis and what relies upon this basis

a7) RTEN DANG BRTEN PA DANG LDAN PA’I PHYOGS DGAG PA,
	[f. 231b, vv. VI.142, VI.143]

A denial of the position which says that both basis and what relies upon this
basis are involved

b7) BKAG PA RNAMS KYI DON BSDOMS TE BSTAN PA, [f. 232a,
vv. VI.144, VI.145]
A summary presentation of the denials.

d6) DE NYID DANG GZHAN NYID DU MED PA’I GANG ZAG RDZAS YOD DGAG
	[f. 233a]
Denying a substantial form of the person that would be neither itself nor something
other than itself

a7) PHYOGS SNGA MA BRJOD PA, [f. 233a, v. VI.146]
Describing the position taken by the other party

b7) LUGS DE DGAG PA, [f. 233b, vv. VI.147, VI.148, VI.149]
Disproving that position

e6) BDAG BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA TZAM DU BZHAG PA DPE DANG
BCAS PAR BSHAD, [f. 234a]
Explaining, with the use of a metaphor, how it is that we establish that the
self is something labelled through dependence

a7) BDAG MTHA’ BDUN DU MED KYANG BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA
SHING RTA DANG ‘DRA BAR BSTAN PA, [f. 234a, vv. VI.150,
VI.151]
A demonstration that, even though the self is devoid of the seven extremes,
it is still similar to a wagon, in being labeled in dependence

b7) SNGAR MA BSHAD PA’I PHYOGS LHAG MA GNYIS RGYAS PAR
BSHAD PA, [f. 235a]
An extended explanation of two additional positions which have not
been covered so far

a8) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 235a]
The actual point

	a9) TSOGS PA SHING RTAR ‘DOD PA DGAG PA,
		[f. 235a, v. VI.152]
			Denying the position that the collection
constitutes the wagon

b9) DBYIBS TZAM SHING RTAR ‘DOD PA DGAG PA,
	[f. 235b, vv. VI.153, VI.154, VI.155]
Denying the position that the outline itself could be
the wagon	

b8) RIGS PA DE GZHAN LA KHA SPO BA, [f. 236b, vv. VI.156,
	VI.157]
Applying this logic to other cases

c7) DE LTAR BSHAD PA LA GZHAN GYI RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 237a,
	[v. VI.158]
Rejecting arguments by others concerning this way of explaining
things

d7) MING GI THA SNYAD KYI DON GZHAN YANG GRUB PAR
BSTAN PA, [f. 238a, v. VI.159]
A demonstration how there is another interpretation of the meaning
of terms used as names

f6) DE LTAR BZHAG PA LA MTHAR ‘DZIN GYI RTOG PA SPANG SLA BA’I
YON TAN BSTAN PA, [f. 238b]
A demonstration of how setting things forth in this manner has the advantage of
making it easy to eliminate the notion where we hold to things in some
extreme way

a7) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 238b, v. VI.160]
	The actual point being made

b7) DE LA RTZOD PA SPONG BA, [f. 239b, v. VI.161]
Refuting argument on the point

c7) SHING RTA DANG BDAG GI THA SNYAD RNAMS DPE DON DU
SBYAR BA, [f. 240a, v. VI.162]
Explaining the terms of a wagon and the self with reference to a metaphor
and its referent

d7) BRTEN NAS BTAGS PA’I BDAG KHAS LEN PA’I YON TAN GZHAN
BSTAN PA, [f. 240a, v. VI.163]
Demonstrating further advantages to accepting the position of a self which
is labeled in dependence

e7) MKHAS RMONGS KYI ‘CHING GROL GYI GZHI’I BDAG NGOS
GZUNG BA, [f. 241a, v. VI.164]
An identification of the self, which is the foundation for the bondage
& liberation of the ignorant & masters


*  *  *

b5) BDAG GI BA RANG BZHIN GYIS
GRUB PA DGAG PA, [f. 241b, 
v. VI.165]
Denying that what belongs to the self
could exist through any nature
of its own

c4) BDAG DANG SHING RTA’I DPYAD PA DNGOS
PO GZHAN LA YANG BSGRE BAR
BSTAN PA, [f. 242a]
The way in which we can apply our examination of
the self, and of a wagon, to other entities as well

a5) BUM SNAM SOGS KYI DNGOS PO LA BSGRE BA, [f. 242a, vv. VI.166, VI.167]
Showing how this examination follows for entities such as water pitchers, bolts of cloth, and the like

b5) RGYU DANG ‘BRAS BU’I DNGOS PO LA BSGRE BA, [f. 243a, vv. VI.168, VI.169
VI.170]
Showing how the examination follows for the entitites of cause & effect

c5) DE LA GZHAN GYI RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 244b]
Refuting any other argument on these points

	a6) RGYU ‘BRAS RANG BZHIN GYIS GRUB PA ‘GOG PA LA SKYON MTSUNGS PA’I RTZOD PA, [f. 244b,
	vv. VI.171, VI.172]
							Argument that the problems are just
the same with the denial that
cause & effect could exist through
any nature of its own

b6) RANG LA SKYON MI MTSUNGS PA’I LAN BSTAN PA, [f. 245a]
							Presenting a response which shows
that the problems are not the
same with our position


*  *  *

a7) RANG GI PHYOGS LA SUN ‘BYIN DANG SGRUB PA ‘THAD TSUL, [f. 245a]
Demonstrating how the attack and the proof utilized in our own position are correct

a8) THA SNYAD DU GZHAN PHYOGS SUN ‘BYIN PA KHAS LEN TSUL,
	[f. 245a, v. VI.173]
How it is that we accept, nominally, the attack of the opposing position

b8) RANG GI PHYOGS SGRUB PA KHAS LEN TSUL, [f. 246b, vv. VI.174, VI. 175]
How it is that we accept the proof of our own position

b7) GZHAN GYI THAL BA MI MTSUNGS PA’I RGYU MTSAN GSAL BAR BSHAD PA,
	[f. 247b, v. VI.176]
A clear explanation of the reason why our position is not equivalent to the statement 
of a necessary implication for the other party

c7) RANG BZHIN MED PA BSGRUB NUS PA BZHIN DU GZHAN GYIS BZLOG
STE BSGRUB MI NUS PA, [f. 248a, v. VI.177]
A demonstration of how—so long as we are able to establish that things have no nature
of their own—the other party will be unable to prove any denial of our position

d7) ‘DIR MA BSHAD PA’I SUN ‘BYIN LHAG MA SHES PAR BYED TSUL LO,
	[f. 248b, v. VI.178]
Showing how we can understand additional attacks that have not been explained here


*  *  *


	c2) DES GRUB PA’I STONG NYID KYI RAB DBYE BSHAD PA,
		[f. 249b]
	An explanation of the divisions of emptiness thus confirmed

		a3) STONG PA NYID KYI DBYE BA MDOR BSTAN PA,
			[f. 249b, vv. VI.179, VI.180]
		A brief presentation of the divisions of emptiness

b3) PHYE BA SO SO’I DON RGYAS PAR BSHAD PA,
	[f. 250b]
A more detailed explanation of what each division involves

a4) STONG NYID BCU DRUG TU PHYE BA RGYAS
PAR BSHAD PA, [f. 250b]
						A detailed explanation of the division
of emptiness into sixteen types

a5) NANG STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA
BZHI BSHAD PA, [f. 251a]
An explanation of the four starting with
emptiness on the inside


*  *  *


a6) NANG STONG PA NYID BSHAD PA, [f. 251a]
An explanation of emptiness on the inside

a7) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 251a, v. VI.181, VI.182]
The actual point

b7) ZHAR LA RANG BZHIN KHAS LEN TSUL BSTAN PA, [f. 252a]
An incidental presentation on how we accept a nature to things

b6) STONG NYID LHAG MA GSUM BSHAD PA, [f. 254b, v. VI.183, VI.184a, VI.184b,
VI.185, VI.186]
An explanation of the remaining three types of emptiness here


*  *  *


b6) CHEN PO STONG PA NYID LA SOGS PA
BZHI BSHAD PA, [f. 255a, vv. VI.187, 
VI.188, VI.189, VI.190, VI.191, VI.192]
An explanation of the four starting with great
emptiness

c6) MTHA’ LAS ‘DAS PA STONG PA NYID
LA SOGS PA BZHI BSHAD PA, [f. 255b,
vv. VI.193, VI.194, VI.195, VI.196, VI.197,
VI.198, VI.199] 
An explanation of the four starting with
emptiness beyond all extremes

d6) CHOS THAMS CAD STONG PA NYID
LA SOGS PA BZHI BSHAD PA, [f. 256b]
	An explanation of the four starting with
the emptiness of all things

a7) CHOS THAMS CAD STONG PA
NYID BSHAD PA, [f. 256b, vv. VI.200, VI.201a]
An explanation of the emptiness of
all things

b7) RANG GI MTSAN NYID STONG PA
NYID BSHAD PA, [f. 257a]
An explanation of the emptiness of
	its own quality

a8) MDOR BSTAN, [f. 257a,
	v. VI.201b] 
A briefer explanation

b8) RGYAS PAR BSHAD, [f. 257a,
	vv. VI.202, VI.203, VI.204] 
A more detailed explanation


*  *  *


a9) GZHI’I CHOS KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID, [f. 257a, vv. VI.202, VI.203, VI.204]
The own quality of things related to the time of the original condition

b9) LAM GYI CHOS KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID, [f. 257b, vv. VI.205, VI.206, VI.207,
	VI.208, VI.209]
The own quality of things related to the time of the path

c9) ‘BRAS BU’I CHOS KYI RANG GI MTSAN NYID, [f. 258b, v. VI.210, VI.211, VI.212,
	VI.213, VI.214]
The own quality of things related to the time of the result


*  *  *

c8) DON BSDU BA, [f. 260a,
	v. VI.215] 
	A concluding summary

c7) MI DMIGS PA DANG DNGOS PO
MED PA’I NGO BO NYID
STONG PA NYID BSHAD PA,
[f. 260a, v. VI.216, VI.217,
VI.218]
An explanation of both the emptiness of
not seeing anything and the
emptiness of true nature,
beyond all things

b6) STONG NYID BZHIR PHYE BA RGYAS
PAR BSHAD PA, [f. 260b, v. VI.219, VI.220,
VI.221, VI.222, VI.223]
					A detailed explanation of the division of
emptiness into four types

iv) SA’I YON TAN BRJOD PA’I SGO NAS MJUG BSDU BA, [f. 261b, vv. VI.224,
	VI.225, VI.226]
A concluding summary for the section, by way of describing the high qualities of this level


*  *  *


c) RING DU SONG BA SOGS SA BZHI BSHAD PA’O,, [f. 262b]
An explanation of the four levels starting with Gone Far

	i) SA BDUN PA BSHAD PA, [f. 262b, VII.1]
An explanation of the seventh bodhisattva level

ii) SA BRGYAD PA BSHAD PA, [f. 263b]
An explanation of the eighth bodhisattva level

		a1) SA ‘DIR SMON LAM LHAG CING ‘GOG PA LAS SLONG TSUL,
			[f. 263b, v. VIII.1]
		A description of how, at this level, ones prayers are special,
and how they rise out of their cessation

b1) NYON MONGS THAMS CAD ZAD PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 264b,
	v. VIII.2]
		A description of how they finish off all their negative emotions

c1) DBANG BCU THOB PAR BSTAN PA, [f. 265b, v. VIII.3]
A description of how they attain the ten powers

iii) SA DGU PA BSHAD PA, [f. 266a, v. IX.1]
An explanation of the ninth bodhisattva level

iv) SA BCU PA BSHAD PA, [f. 267a, v. X.1]
An explanation of the tenth bodhisattva level


*  *  *


iii. SA BCU’I YON TAN BSTAN PA’O, [f. 268a]
A description of the high good qualities of the ten

a) SA DANG PO’I YON TAN BSHAD PA,
	[f. 268a, vv. afterword.1, afterword.2,
afterword.3]
An explanation of the high good qualities of
the first level

b) SA GNYIS PA NAS BDUN PA’I BAR GYI
YON TAN BSHAD PA, [f. 268b, vv. afterword.4,
afterword.5]
An explanation of the high good qualities of the
second to the seventh levels

c) DAG PA SA GSUM GYI YON TAN BSHAD PA,
	[f. 268b, vv. afterword.6, afterword.7,
	afterword.8, afterword.9]
An explanation of the high good qualities of the
three pure levels

2. ‘BRAS BU’I SA, [f. 269b]
A presentation of the levels which consist of the result

	a. DANG POR SANGS RGYAS PA’I TSUL, [f. 269b]
The way in which we first reach our enlightenment

				i. DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 269b, vv. afterword.10,
					afterword.11]
The actual point

ii. RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 270b]
Refuting argument on this point

	a) PHYOGS SNGA MA DGOD PA, [f. 270b,
		v. afterword.12]
	Phrasing the position of the other party

b) LUGS DE DGAG PA, [f. 271a]
A refutation of this position

	i) DE KHO NA NYID RTOGS PA MI ‘THAD
PA’I RTZOD PA SPANG BA,
[f. 271a, v. afterword.13]
						Refuting argment which says that the idea
of realizing suchness is mistaken

ii) MKHYEN PA PO MI ‘THAD PA’I
RTZOD PA SPANG BA, [f. 273b]
Refuting argument which says that our idea 
about the one who gains the knowledge 
in this case is mistaken as well

a1) DNGOS KYI DON, [f. 273b,
	v. afterword.14]
The actual point

b1) DE’I ‘THAD PA DNGOS BSTAN PA,
	[f. 274a, vv. afterword.15,
		afterword.16]
A direct demonstration of how
this point is correct

b. SKU DANG YON TAN GYI RNAM GZHAG [f. 274b]
A description of the holy body, and the fine qualities, that we
then achieve

i. SKU’I RNAM GZHAG [f. 274b]
A presentation of the holy bodies

a) CHOS KYI SKU BSHAD PA, [f. 274b,
	vv. afterword.17, afterword.18a]
An explanation of the holy body of all things

b) LONGS SPYOD RDZOGS PA’I SKU
BSHAD PA, [f. 275b, v. afterword.18b]
					An explanation of the holy body complete
						in all enjoyments

c) RGYU MTHUN PA’I SKU BSHAD PA,
[f. 276a]
An explanation of corresponding holy bodies

						i) SKU DANG BA SPU’I KHUNG BU
GCIG TU RANG GI SPYOD PA
KUN STON TSUL, [f. 276a, vv. 
afterword.19, afterword.20,
afterword.21, afterword.22]
						Their holy body, and the way in which
they display all of their activities 
within a single pore of their body

ii) GNAS DER GZHAN GYI SPYOD PA
KUN STON TSUL, [f. 277a, vv. 
afterword.23, afterword.24,
afterword.25]
						The way in which they display all the
							activities of others in that location

iii) BZHED PA LA MNGA’ BSGYUR BA
PHUN SUM TSOGS PA
BSHAD PA, [f. 277b, vv. 
afterword.26, afterword.27]
						An explanation of how they have the 
perfect power to carry out their
wishes

ii. STOBS KYI YON TAN GYI RNAM GZHAG [f. 278a]
A description of the fine qualities of the forces

	a) STOBS BCU MDOR BSTAN PA, [f. 278a, vv.
		afterword.28, afterword.29, afterword.30]
	A brief presentation of the ten forces

b) DE RNAMS RGYAS PAR BSHAD, [f. 278b]
A more extensive explanation of the ten forces

	i) GNAS DANG GNAS MIN
MKHYEN PA SOGS KYI STOBS
LNGA BSHAD PA, [f. 278b, vv.
afterword.31, afterword.32,
afterword.33, afterword.34,
afterword.35}
						An explanation of the five forces beginning with
that of knowing what is actual, and
what is not

ii) THAMS CAD DU ‘GRO BA’I LAM 
MKHYEN PA SOGS KYI STOBS 
LNGA BSHAD PA [f. 279b, vv.
afterword.36, afterword.37,
afterword.38, afterword.39,
afterword.40}
						An explanation of the five forces beginning with
that of knowing the paths that lead
to every different kind of goal

c) YON TAN KUN BRJOD MI NUS PA’I TSUL,
	[f. 281a, vv. afterword.41, afterword.42]
A discussion of how it would be impossible
ever to describe all these fine qualities

d) YON TAN GNYIS SHES PA’I PHAN YON
BSTAN PA [f. 281b, v. afterword.43]	
A demonstration of the benefits of understanding
	the two kinds of fine qualities

c. SPRUL PA’I SKU BSTAN PA, [f. 282a, v. afterword.44]
A presentation concerning our emanation body

d. THEG PA GCIG TU BSGRUB PA, [f. 282a, vv. afterword.45,
	afterword.46, afterword.47]
A proof that in the end it is all a single path

e. MNGON PAR BYANG CHUB PA DANG BZHUGS PA’I
DUS KYI BSHAD PA, [f. 283b]
An explanation of the point at which we have become
enlightened, and remain there

i. MNGON PAR BYANG CHUB PA’I DUS KYI DBANG
DU BYAS PA’I BSHAD PA, [f. 283b, v. afterword.48]
				An explanation relative to the point at which one reaches
total enlightenment

ii. BZHUGS PA’I DUS KYI DBANG DU BYAS PA’I
BSHAD PA, [f. 284b, vv. afterword.49,
afterword.50, afterword.51]
An explanation relative to the point at which one is
residing in total enlightenment

C. BSTAN BCOS JI LTAR BRTZAMS PA’I TSUL, [f. 285a, vv. colophon.1,
colophon.2, colophon.3, colophon.4]
A description of how it was that the commentary was first composed

D. BSTAN BCOS BRTZAMS PA’I DGE BA BSNGO BA [f. 287a, 
v. colophon.5]
A dedication of the virtue of having completed the composition

IV. MJUG GI DON, [f. 287b]
The meaning of the conclusion

A. SLOB DPON GANG GIS MDZAD PA, [f. 287b, colophon.6, colophon.7]
Identifying the Master who composed the work

B. LO PAn GANG GIS BSGYUR BA, [f. 287b, translators.1, translators.2,
	translators.3, translators.4]
Identifying the ancient translators and sages who rendered
		the work into Tibetan




Appendices





About the translator,
and the translation

Geshe Michael Roach was born in Los Angeles and grew up in Phoenix, Arizona.  He graduated with honors from Princeton University, and is a recipient of the Presidential Scholar medallion from the President of the United States at the White House.  He has also received the McConnell Scholarship Prize from the Princeton School of Public & International Affairs, as well as an honorary doctorate in the Congress of Mexico from the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM).

Michael is the first foreigner in the 600-year history of Tibet’s Sera Mey Monastery to receive the title of Geshe (Master of Buddhism), after 25 years of study.  After graduation, he founded the Asian Classics Institute (ACI), translating over 20,000 pages of the geshe program and designing 36 courses of studies in English, for modern people of all walks of life.

At his teacher’s directive, Michael—in order to confirm that the principles of the ancient texts could be used in modern life—helped in 1981 to found the Andin International Corporation, which became one of the largest diamond jewelry companies in the world, and was purchased by super-investor Warren Buffett in 2009.  Michael used the majority of his income from the business to found and run the Asian Classics Input Project (now called ALL, or Asian Legacy Library), starting in 1987.  This is the largest free, online searchable database of ancient Asian literature in the world.

Michael also helped found the Three Jewels Outreach Center of New York; DCI Global; the Sedona College of International Management; the Yoga Studies Institute; Green Stretch Pen; Diamond Mountain Retreat Center; The Knowledge Base; Diamond Cutter Press; DSEU University; Classics Soft Power; Innovation Retreats; Dragonshead; and the Diamond Cutter Classics translation center.  Each of these institutions helps preserve and make available the precious wisdom of ancient Asia, in the modern world.

Michael is the author of some 100 books and major translations.  His most popular works include The Diamond Cutter: The Buddha on Managing Your Business & Your Life; and How Yoga Works.  He lives in the small town of Rimrock, Arizona, with his wife Veronica, whom he first met some 50 years ago.  Together they enjoy gardening, charitable work, and running their small Peach Tree Café, for local cowboys & cowgirls.

Just a few technical notes about the translation.  For the Sanskrit you find here, our "codex
unicus” is the manuscript from Tibet of the Madhyamakāvatāra Bhāṣya by Master Chandrakirti, which includes the verses of  the Madhyamakāvatāra as well.  This is the sole extant and only recently available Sanskrit manuscript, which had been preserved for centuries in the Potala Palace in Lhasa, but which is not yet available to the larger scholarly community. 

For the first five chapters, we have the critical and diplomatic editions published in 2022 based on the microfilm copy of this  manuscript, kept in the China Tibetology Research Centre (CTRC) in Beijing, with collaborative work performed by the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IKGA). 

For the sixth chapter we have the critical edition published by Xuezhu Li in 2014, who extracted the Madhyamakāvatāra Kārikā verses from the same manuscript.  Chapters 7 through 13 have not yet been published by the IKGA & CTRC, and were not available for our research.

As for the presentation of the Sanskrit here in situ, you will see that we normally present the entire Sanskrit verse together, and then in specific cases split its Tibetan counterpart into pieces below it.  This is necessary because of the difference in word and line order within verses between the two languages.

Scholars will note that our DCC standard is to separate out the Sanskrit words where this is practical, since our goal for adding the Sanskrit in the first place is to help students, rather than scholars, of Sanskrit—since the latter will be able to access the verses with combined words easily in the same published sources that we availed ourselves of.

As for the Tibetan edition here, the text was early on input from the only edition available at the time, published by Guru Deva Rinpoche and sponsored by the wonderful Khen Rinpoche Geshe Lobsang Tharchin.  This edition had many problems with it, due to the fact that it was printed off of film retouched by inexpert scribes.  We have in the meantime worked hard to correct it, but no doubt a few problems remain.

Where our corrections to the Tibetan manuscript might be questioned; are particularly difficult to detect; or may bring out interesting historical variants, we have added a note of the original and the correction in the format of {%..}.  More obvious corrections are made silently.

The original here was the Shul Parkang (Zhol par-khang) edition.  We have inserted into this edition the root text from the Derge edition of the Tengyur, which explains for the scholar the differing folio numbers in situ seen in some cases.

We may finally note that we have not included in this introduction the typical biographical information for the author, Je Tsongkapa, since we have already previously published his definitive biography under the title of King of the Dharma: the Illustrated Life of Je Tsongkapa, Teacher of the First Dalai Lama, with the Complete Paintings and the Original Text of the All-Knowing One, Jamyang Shepay Dorje (1648-1721).



Acknowledgements

Here at the Diamond Cutter Classics project, we often refer to the process of translating a new book as “snow on the mountain,” meaning that the entire process of putting out a new work closely resembles the way in which snow falls upon a high mountain peak; gradually melts; and then wends its way down the mountain to the valleys—and from there inevitably to feed the ocean.

Our thanks to all the people whose hard work to make our translations possible follows the same pattern.

First, at the peak of the mountain, is the snow-treasure of the Asian Legacy Library’s free online database of ancient Asian books.  Millions of pages have been scanned or input in searchable form, under the leadership of executive director John Brady, over the last 35 years.  He is assisted by—just to name a few—Emma Lewis, Aisha Maria Nguyen, Christine Vimala Sperber, Christina Kasica, Joel Crawford, Arina Garcia, Osiris Luciano, Ben Ghalmi, Ven. Phil Baker, and Alona Stoliarchuk.

The massive labor of inputting all of the Tibetan works in the database over all of these years has been completed by the ALL Input Operator Team, headed now for many years by Ms. Sonam Lhamo.  At the National Library of Mongolia, the catalog team has been led by the Library Director, Ms. Bayarkhuu Ichinkhorloo; and the Project Manager, Dr. Sainbileg Byambadorj.  The new cataloging project at Gandantegchinlen Library is led by Ven. Munkhbaatar Batchuluun.

ALL’s Sanskrit materials are input at the Varanasi ALL Input Center, under the direction of Dr. Santosh Dwivedi; the Kathmandu ALL Input Center, directed by Drs. Miroj & Milan Shakya; and the Kerala ALL Input Center, directed by Dr. N.V. Ramachandran.  Thank you all for your endless work!  

We are very grateful for Aisha Maria Nguyen, who tirelessly searches every corner of the web for any and all Sanskrit materials that we may need input; as well as David & Nancy Reigle, for helping to define and provide us with the most accurate, high-quality editions possible of any work in the Sanskrit language.  We also thank Stanley Chen for his advice on Chinese-language sources.

The cataloging and input work cannot be accessed without the priceless subject cataloging by the Diamond Cutter Classics team dedicated to this 35-year effort, now led by Nicholas Lashaw, Ben Kramer, and Geshe Michael Roach—along with Dr. Word Smith, Oscar Leon, and Anatole Nguyen.  Nick & Ben also manage the DCC translator team, including all our fellow translators, and we would like to share deep gratitude with every one of them—you keep us going!

We are also infinitely indebted to all those who support the work of DCC, around the world; including our tireless and deeply dedicated sponsors.

We rely heavily upon the fine work of the Buddhist Digital Resource Center (BDRC) for obtaining original scans of the many source works our translations require.  The Head Librarian, Karma Gongde, has offered us years of wonderful service and advice; and BDRC Executive Director Dr. Jann Ronis and Chief Technology Officer Élie Roux continue to give all of us really excellent support.

The next step in translation is the manuscript editing, which for technical books like this one is always a massive effort.  We would especially like to thank Anatole Nguyen, Bets Greer, Nick Lashaw, and all the other editors contributing their time.  We are in awe of the work by the Diamond Cutter Press staff, who get all these translations out into the world—especially in the new ebook formats, and dedicated DCP app.  Thank you DCP director Rosa van Grieken, Ven. Elizabeth van der Pas, Katey Fetch, and master artist Gina Rivera.

Our entire translation team would have no central place to meet and conduct the many hundreds of translation sessions that books like this require, without the offices in Sedona, Arizona, supplied through years of effort by John Brady; Connie O’Brien; Tim Lowenhaupt; and Gail Deutsch.  Thanks as well to the wonderful staff of the Peach Tree Cafe of Rimrock, Arizona, for countless happy hours of meetings there.

We are also extremely grateful for the special sponsorship of the entire Diamond Cutter Classics translation team.  Recently, the expenses of our team have in addition been covered through the Good Night Book Club project, led by Lindsay Jilk and regional directors Inna Ivanina (Europe & North America); Tina Lyu (mainland China); Olga Van-Dick (Latin America); Nguyen Cong Binh (Vietnam); and Sugeng Shi & Xintian Ie (East & Southeast Asia).

Our grateful thanks to all of you, and to everyone else who has contributed to our work.  Your trust in us is a big part of the reason why we can complete projects—like the present volume—which require quite nearly a decade each.




Bibliography of Works
Originally Written in Sanskrit

Names followed by an asterisk are reconstructed.	

$$$Need to check vol #s in all the Tengyur & Kangyur entries here; some were old and mistaken
	
S1
Jayananda (Tib: rGyal-bas dgyes), c. @ad.  An Explanation of “Entering the Middle Way,” (Madhyāmakāvatārasya ṭīkā) (Tib: dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i ‘grel-bshad,  Tibetan translation at TD03870, ff. 1b-365a of Vol. 9 [Ra] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S2
Candrakīrti (Tib: Zla-ba grags-pa), c. 625ad.  Entering the Middle Way (Madhyāmaka Avatāra) (Tib: dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03861, ff. 201b-219a of Vol. 7 [‘A] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S3
Candrakīrti (Tib: Zla-ba grags-pa), c. 625ad.  The Autocommentary to “Entering the Middle Way” (Madhyāmaka Avatāra Bhāṣa) (Tib: dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03862, ff. 220b-348a of Vol. 7 [‘A] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  We also reference the sNar-thang edition version at ff. 266a-415a of Vol. 111 [‘A] in that Middle Way Section.

S4
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub) c. 200ad.  The Foundational Verses on the Middle Way entitled “Wisdom” (Prajñā Nāma Mūla Madhyāmaka Kārika) (Tib: dBu-ma rtza-ba’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa shes-rab ces-bya-ba, Tibetan translation at TD03824, ff. 1b-19a of Vol. 1 [Tza] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).
     We also utilize the Sanskrit/Chinese/Tibetan edition by Ye Shaoyong: The Madhyamaka-karika—A Collated, Guided Reading, Translation, and Annotation of Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese Texts (Zhongxi Book Company, 1st edition, 2011).   龙树菩萨，约公元2世纪；叶少勇校注，2011年。《〈中论颂〉——梵藏汉合校·导读·译注》（上海：中西书局，2011年第1版）

S5
Bhāvaviveka (Tib: Legs-ldan ‘byed) c. @ad.  The Lamp on Wisdom: A Commentary to the “Foundational Work on the Middle Way” (Prajñā Pradīpa Mūla Madhyāmika Vṛtti) (Tib: dBu-ma’i rtza-ba’i ‘grel-pa Shes-rab sgron-ma, Tibetan translation at TD03853, ff. 45b-259b of Vol. 2 [Tsa] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S6
Candrakīrti (Tib: Zla-ba grags-pa), c. 625ad.  A Clarification of the Verses: A Commentary upon the “Foundational Work on the Middle Way” (Mūla Madhyāmika Vṛtti Prasanna Padā Nāma) (Tib: dBu-ma rtza-ba’i ‘grel-pa Tsigs-gsal-ba, Tibetan translation at TD03860, ff. 1b-200a of Vol. 7 [‘A] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S7
[Said to be after the work of] Paurṇamāsī (Tib: Zla-ba gang-ba), c. @ad.  The Compendium of Sanskrit Roots (Dhatukāya) (Tib: Byings kyi tsogs, Tibetan translation at TD04277, ff. 71a-78a of Vol. 1 [Re] in the Sanskrit Materials Section [Śabdasūtra, sGra-mdo] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S8
Anubhūtisvarūpa (Tib: Aa-nu bh’u-ti sva-r’u-pa), c. @ad.  A Clarification of the Categories of Grammar, a Commentary upon “The Proclamation of the Lady of Song,” a Major Treatise upon the Construction of Sanskrit (Skt brief title in situ: Prakriyāṃcaturā) (Tib: brDa sprod-pa’i bstan-bcos chen-po dByangs-can by’a-ka-ra-ṇa’i ‘grel-pa Rab-tu bya-ba gsal-ldan, Tibetan translation at TD04298, ff. 10a-125a of Vol. 118 [Se] in the Sanskrit Materials Section [Śabdasūtra, sGra-mdo] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S9
Ratnākaraśānta (Tib: Rin-chen ‘byung-gnas zhi-ba), c. @ad. The Source of Jewels, a Book of Composition (Chandaratnākara) (Tib: sDeb-sbyor rin-chen ‘byung-gnas, Tibetan translation at TD04303, ff. 351b-360b of Vol. 4 [Se] in the Sanskrit Materials Section [Śabdasūtra, sGra-mdo] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S10
Maitreya (Tib: Byams-pa), as dictated to Asaṅga (Tib: Thogs-med), c. 350ad.  The Jewel of Realizations, a Book of Advices upon the Perfection of Wisdom (Abhisamayālaṅkāra Nāma Prajñāpāramitopadeśa Śāstra) (Tib: Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa’i man-ngag gi bstan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan, Tibetan translation at TD03786, ff. 1b-13a of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Perfection of Wisdom Section [Prajñāpāramitā, Shes-phyin] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S11
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Holy Teaching of the White Lotus, a Sutra of the Greater Way (Saddharma Puṇḍarīka Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: Dam-pa’i chos padma dkar-po zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00113, ff. 1a-285b of Vol. 7 [Ja] in the Sutra Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S12
Haribhadra (Tib: Seng-ge bzang-po), c. @ad.  A Commentary to “The Jewel of Realizations, a Book of Advices upon the Perfection of Wisdom”  (Abhisamayālaṃkāra Nāma Prajñāpāramita Updeśa Śāstra Vṛtti) (Tib: Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa’i man-ngag gi bstan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan zhes-bya-ba’i ‘grel-pa; Tibetan brief title, ‘Grel-pa don-gsal, Tibetan translation at TD03793, ff. 78b-140a of Vol. 7 [Ja] in the Perfection of Wisdom Section [Prajñāpāramitā, Shes-phyin] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S13
Āryadeva (Tib: ‘Phags-pa lha), c. 225ad.  Stanzas entitled “A Classical Commentary in 400 Verses” (Catuḥśataka Śāstra Kārikā Nāma) (Tib: bsTan-bcos bzhi-brgya-pa zhes-bya-ba’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03846, ff. 1b-18a of Vol. 2 [Tsa] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S14
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled, “The Account of Kashyapa, the Protector of Light” (Ārya Kāśyapa Parivarta Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa ‘Od-srung gi le’u zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00087, ff. 211a-260b of Vol. 6 [Cha] in the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratnakūta, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S15
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Exalted Sutra named “The Perfect Compendium of All Things” (Ārya Saṃgīti Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Chos yang-dag-par sdud-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00238, ff. 1b-154a of Vol. 19 [Dza] in the Sutra Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S16
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  The String of Precious Jewels, Words Offered to the King (Rāja Parikathā Ratna Mālī) (Tib: rGyal-po la gtam-bya-ba Rin-po-che’i phreng-ba, Tibetan translation at TD04158, ff. 107a-126a of Vol. 1 [Ge-2] in the Epistles Section [Lekha, sPring-yig] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S17
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “Urging Us to Take Personal Responsibility” (Ārya Adhyāśaya Saṃcodana Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Lhag-pa’i bsam-pa bskul-ba zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00069, ff. 2426a-278b of Vol. 5 [Ca] in the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratnakūta, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S18
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Foundation of Vowed Morality (Vinaya Vastu) (Tib: ‘Dul-ba gzhi, Tibetan translation in four volumes: KL00001-1, ff. 1a-380a of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Discipline Section [Vinaya, ‘Dul-ba] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]; KL00001-2, ff. 1a-505a of Vol. 2 [Kha]; KL00001-3, ff. 1a-435a of Vol. 3 [Ga]; and KL00001-4, ff. 1a-436a of Vol. 4 [Nga]). 

S19
Candrakīrti (Tib: Zla-ba grags-pa), c. 625ad.  A Detailed Explanation of the 400 Verses describing the Way of Practice of a Bodhisattva (Bodhisattva Yogacara Catuśataka Ṭīkā) (Tib: Byang-chub-sems-dpa’i rnal-’byor spyod-pa bZhi-brgya-pa’i rgya-cher ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03865, ff. 30b-239a of Vol. 8 [Ya] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S20
Candragomi (Tib: Tzandra-go-mi), c. @ad.  A Praise of Confession (Deśanā Stava) (Tib: Bshags-pa’i bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01159, ff. 204a-206b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S21
Kamalaśīla (Tib: Ka-ma-la-sh’i-la), c. 770ad.  The First Section of “The Stages of Meditation” (Bhāvanakrama 1) (Tib: bsGom-pa’i rim-pa dang-po, Tibetan translation at TD03915, ff. 22a-41b of Vol. 15 [Ki] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S22
Śāntarakṣita (Tib: Zhi-ba ‘tso), c. @ad.  Verses on the Jewel of the Middle Way (Madhyāmika Alaṃkāra Kārikā) (Tib: dBu-ma rgyan gyi tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03884, ff. 53a-56b of Vol. 28 [Sa] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S23
Śāntarakṣita (Tib: Zhi-ba ‘tso), c. @ad.  A Commentary to the “Jewel of the Middle Way” (Madhyāmaka Alaṃkāra Vṛtti) (Tib: dBu-ma rgyan gyi ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03885, ff. 56b-84a of Vol. 12 [Sa] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S24
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  Sixty Verses on Reasoning (Yuktiṣaṣṭhakā Kārikā, @ check carving since Chandra repeats Yuktiṣaṣṭikā]) (Tib: Rigs-pa drug-cu-pa’i tsig-le’ur byas pa, Tibetan translation at TD03825, ff. 20b-22b of Vol. 1 [Tza] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 
   The text and its commentary by Gyaltsab Je (1364-1432) has been translated & published by the present Diamond Cutter Classics Series as Nothing Is the Way It Seems: The Sixty Verses of Nagarjuna (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2023).

S25
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Letter to a Friend (Suhṛllekha) (Tib: bShes-pa’i spring-yig, Tibetan translation at TD04182, ff. 40b-46b of Vol. 2 [Nge] in the Epistles Section [Lekha, sPring-yig] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). English translation at %%E5.

S26
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Praise of the The Realm of Reality (Dharmadhātu Stava) (Tib: Chos kyi dbyings-su bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01118, ff. 63b-67b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S27
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  The Compendium of All the Sutras (Sūtra Samuccaya) (Tib: mDo kun las btus-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03934, ff. 148b-215a of Vol. 15 [Ki] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S28
Śāntideva (Tib: Zhi-ba lha), c. 750ad.  Verses on the Compendium of All the Trainings (Śikṣāsamuccaya Kārikā) (Tib: bsLab-pa kun las btus-pa’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03939, ff. 1b-3a of Vol. 16 [Khi] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S29
Śāntideva (Tib: Zhi-ba lha), c. 750ad.  The Compendium of All the Trainings (Śikṣāsamuccaya) (Tib: bsLab-pa kun las btus-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03940, ff. 3a-194b of Vol. 16 [Khi] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S30
Bhāvaviveka (Tib: Bha-bya or Legs-ldan-’byed), c. @ ad.  Verses on the Heart of the Middle Way (Madhyāmaka Hṛdaya Kārikā) (Tib: dBu-ma’i snying-po’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03855, ff. 1b-40b of Vol. 3 [Dza] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S31
Atīśa, or Dīpaṃkara (Tib: Aa-ti-sha, or Mar-me-mdzad), c. @ ad.  A Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment (Bodhipātha Pradīpa) (Tib: Byang-chub lam gyi sgron-ma, Tibetan translation at TD03947, ff. 238a-241a of Vol. 16 [Khi] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S32
Kamalaśīla (Tib: Ka-ma-la-sh’i-la), c. @ad.  The Middle Section of “The Stages of Meditation” (Bhāvanakrama 2) (Tib: bsGom-pa’i rim-pa bar-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03916, ff. 42a-55b of Vol. 15 [Ki] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S33
Kamalaśīla (Tib: Ka-ma-la-sh’i-la), c. @ad.  The Final Section of “The Stages of Meditation” (Bhāvanakrama 3) (Tib: bsGom-pa’i rim-pa tha-ma, Tibetan translation at TD03917, ff. 55b-68b of Vol. 15 [Ki] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S34
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  A Great and Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way, the Majority of the Enlightened One, in Extensive Detail (Ārya Buddha Avataṃsaka Nāma Mahāyana Vaipulya Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Sangs-rgyas phal-po-che zhes-bya-ba shin-tu rgyas-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00044, in 6 parts: Vols. 1-6 [Ka-Ca] in the Majority Section [Avataṃsaka, Phal-chen] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S35
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Section on the Ten Levels (Tib: Sa bcu’i le’u [commonly known as Sa bcu-pa’i mdo, or mDo-sde Sa-bcu-pa], Tibetan translation at KL00044-3, ff. 67a-234b of Vol. 3 [Ga] of the Majority Sutra [see %%S34] in the Majority Section [Avataṃsaka, Phal-chen] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S36
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), c. 350ad.  The Treasure House of Higher Knowledge, Set in Verse (Abhidharmakoṣakārikā) (Tib: Chos mngon-pa’i mdzod kyi tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04089, ff. 1b-25a of Vol. 2 [Ku] in the Higher Knowledge Section [Abhidharma, mNgon-pa] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S37
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  [The Exalted King of Prayers, the Prayer of Deeds of Goodness] [(Āryabhadracaryapraṇidhānarāja)] ([Tib: ‘Phags-pa bZang-po spyod-pa’i smon-lam gyi rgyal-po,] Tibetan translation at KL00044-6, ff. 336b-341a of Vol. 6 [Cha] of the Majority Sutra [see %%S34] in the Majority Section [Avataṃsaka, Phal-chen] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S38
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Exalted King of Prayers, the Prayer of Deeds of Goodness (Āryabhadracaryapraṇidhānarāja) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa bZang-po spyod-pa’i smon-lam gyi rgyal-po, Tibetan translation at TD04377, ff. 300b-303b of Vol. 4 [Nyo] in the Miscellany Section [sNa-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S39
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Cloud of the Jewels” (Ārya Ratna Megha Nāma Mahāyāna 
Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa dKon-mchog sprin ces-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00231, ff. 1b-180a of Vol. 18 [Tsa] in the Sutra Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S40
Asaṅga (Tib: Thogs-med), c. 350ad. A Compendium of All the Teachings on Higher Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuccaya) (Tib: Chos mngon-pa kun las btus-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04049, ff. 44a-120a of Vol. 12 [Ri] in the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S41
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Presentation on the Perfection of Wisdom Requested by Suvikranta Vikrama (Ārya Suvikrāntavikrāmaparipṛccha Prajñāpāramitā Nirdeśa) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Rab-kyi rtzal gyis rnam-par gnon-pas zhus-pa, Shes-rab kyi pha-rol-tu phyin-pa bstan-pa, Tibetan translation at KL00014, ff. 1b-123b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Other Teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Section [Sher-phyin sna-tsogs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S42
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), c. @ad [attribution to this author questioned by the native catalog to the Derge Tengyur, no alternate author there suggested].  A Brief Explanation of the Divisions of the Secret Points (Vivṛttiguhyārthapiṇḍavyākhyā) (Tib: Don gsang-ba rnam-par phye-ba bsdus te bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04052, ff. 296b-361a of Vol. 12 [Ri] in the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S43
Asaṅga (Tib: Thogs-med), c. 350ad. A Compendium of the Greater Way (Mahāyāna Saṅgraha) (Tib: Theg-pa chen-po bsdus-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04048, ff. 1b-43a of Vol. 12 [Ri] in the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S44
Avalokitavrata, c. @.  An Extensive Commentary to “The Lamp of Wisdom” (Prajñāpradīpaṭīkā) (Shes-rab sgron-ma rGya-cher ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03859, constituting Vols. 4-6  [Wa, Zha, & Za] of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S45
Maitreya (Tib: Byams-pa), c. 350ad.  The Jewel of the Sutras, a Work of the Greater Way Set in Verse (Mahāyāna Sūtrālaṃkāra Nāma Kārikā) (Theg-pa chen-po mDo-sde’i rgyan zhes-bya-ba’i tsig-le’ur-byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04020, ff. 1b-39a of Vol. 1 (Phi) of the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S46
Dharmakīrti (Tib: Chos kyi grags-pa).  A Detailed Commentary on Accurate Perception (Pramāṇavārtika) (rGyas-pa’i bstan-bcos tsad-ma rnam-’grel, Tibetan translation at TD04210, Vol. 1 [Ce] of the Valid-Perception Section [Pramāṇa, Tsad-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S47
Śāntideva (Tib: Zhi-ba lha).  A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra) (Byang-chub sems-dpa’i spyod-pa la ‘jug-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03871, ff. 1b-40a of Vol. 10 [La] of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S48
Prajñākaramati (Tib: Shes-rab ‘byung-gnas blo-gros).  A Commentary to Difficult Points in the “Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life” (Bodhicaryāvatārapañjikā) (Byang-chub kyi spyod-pa la ‘jug-pa’i dka’-’grel, Tibetan translation at TD03872, ff. 41b-288a of Vol. 10 [La] of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S49
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc. The Perfection of Wisdom in 100,000 Lines (Śatasahasrika Prajñā Pāramitā) (Tib: Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa sTong-phrag brgya-pa, Tibetan translation at KL00008, in 12 parts: Vols 1-12 [Ka-Na] in the “Perfection of Wisdom in 100,000 Lines” Section [Śatasahasrika, ‘Bum] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S50
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Foundation of Assorted Topics of Vowed Morality (Vinaya Kṣudraka Vastu) (Tib: ‘Dul-ba phran-tsegs kyi gzhi, Tibetan translation at KL00006, in 2 parts: Vol 10 [Tha], ff. 1a-467a, and Vol 11 [Da], ff. 1a-509a, in the “Vowed Morality” Section [Vinaya, ‘Dul-ba] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S51
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Meant to Benefit Anguli Mala (Ārya Aṅgulimālīyaṃ Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Sor-mo’i phreng-ba la phan-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00213, ff. 196a-315b of Vol. 16 [Ma] in the “Collection of Sutras” Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S52
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Sutra of the Wise and Foolish (in situ: Dam Mūko Nāma Sūtra [?]) (Tib: mDzangs blun zhes-bya-ba’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00341, ff. 207b-476b of Vol. 28 [Sa] in the “Collection of Sutras” Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S53
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Section for Sthira Adhyashaya” (Ārya Sthirādhyāśaya Parivarta Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa lHag-pa’i bsam-pa brtan-pa’i le’u zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00224, ff. 267a-282a of Vol. 17 [Tza] in the “Collection of Sutras” Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S54
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Diamond Cutter, an Exalted Presentation on the Perfection of Wisdom (Ārya Vajracchedaka Nāma Prajñā Pāramitā Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa rDo-rje gcod-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00016, ff. 215a-235b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the “Other Teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom” Section [Sher-phyin sna-tsogs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 
   The Diamond Cutter Classics Series has published a full translation of the sutra and the excellent commentary by Choney Lama Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748) under the title of Sunlight on the Path to Freedom: A Commentary to the Diamond Cutter Sutra (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2020), 508pp.

S55
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “A Conversation among Buddhas” (Ārya Buddha Saṅgīti Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Sangs-rgyas bgro-ba zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00228, ff. 305b-364a of Vol. 17 [Tza] in the “Collection of Sutras” Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S56
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Commentary on the Wish for Enlightenment (Bodhicitta Vivaraṇa Nāma) (Tib: Byang-chub sems kyi ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01800, ff. 38a-42b of Vol. 34 [Ngi] in the “Secret Teachings” Section [Tantra, rGyud] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S57
Ajitamitra (Tib: Mi-pham bshes-gnyen).  An Extensive Explanation of the “String of Precious Jewels (Ratnavali Ṭīkā) (Tib: Rin-po-che’i phreng-ba’i rgya-cher bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04159, ff. 126a-165a of Vol. 1 [Ge-2] in the Epistles Section [Lekha, sPring-yig] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S58
Candrakīrti (Tib: Zla-ba grags-pa), c. 625ad.  A Commentary to the “Sixty Verses on Reasoning” (Yuktiṣaṣṭikā Vṛtti) (Tib: Rigs-pa drug-cu-pa’i ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03864, ff. 1b-30b of Vol. 8 [Ya] of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S59
Maitreya (Tib: ‘Byams-pa).  A Classical Commentary on the Greater Way entitled “The Higher Line” (Mahāyānottara Tantra Śāstra) (Tib: Theg-pa chen-po rGyud bla-ma’i bstan-bcos, Tibetan translation at TD04024, ff. 54a-73a of Vol. 1 [Phi] of the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S60
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Praise of the One Who Went Beyond the World (Lokātīta Stava) (Tib: ‘Jig-rten las ‘das-par bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01120, ff. 68b-69b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S61
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Praise of the Three Holy Bodies (Kāyatraya Stotra) (Tib: sKu-gsum la bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01124, ff. 70b-71a of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S62
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Praise of the Inconceivable (Acinta Stava) (Tib: bSam gyis mi-khyab-par bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01128, ff. 76b-79a of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S63
Buddhapālita (Tib: Sangs-rgyas bskyangs), c. 500ad.  Buddha Palita: A Commentary on the Foundational Verses of the Middle Way (Buddhapālita Madhyāmaka Vṛtti) (Tib: dBu-ma rtza-ba’i ‘grel-pa Buddha-p’a-li-ta, Tibetan translation at TD03842, ff. 158b-281a of Vol. 1 (Tza) of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S64
Maitreya (Tib: Byams-pa), c. 350ad.  Distinguishing between the Middle and the Extremes, a Work Set in Verse (Madhyānta Vibhaṃga Kārikā) (Tib: dBus dang mtha’ rnam-par ‘byed-pa’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04021, ff. 40a-45a of Vol. 1 (Phi) of the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S65
Maitreya (Tib: Byams-pa), c. 350ad.  Distinguishing Things from the Very Nature of Things (Dharma Dharmatā Vibhaṃgata) (Tib: Chos dang chos-nyid rnam-par ‘byed pa, also commonly known by the abbreviation Chos-nyid rnam-’byed, or Distinguishing the Realm of Things; Tibetan translation at TD04022, ff. 46a-49b of Vol. 1 (Phi) of the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  An alternate version is found at TD04023, ff.  50a-53a, with kārikā (set in verse) added at the end of the title. 

S66
Vimuktasena (Tib: rNam-grol sde), c. 400ad.  A Commentary upon the “Jewel of Realizations,” a Book of Advices in Commentary upon the Exalted Perfection of Wisdom in 25,000 Lines (Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāryaprajñāpāramitopadeśābhisamayālaṃkāraśāstrasya Vṛtti) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa stong-phrag nyi-shu lnga-pa’i man-ngag gi bstan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan gyi ‘grel-pa, commonly known as Nyi-khri snang-ba, or The Illumination of the Twenty Thousand; Tibetan translation at TD03787, ff. 14a-212a 13a of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Perfection of Wisdom Section [Prajñāpāramitā, Shes-phyin] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S67
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "A Box of Precious Jewels" (Ārya Ratna Karaṇḍa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa dKon-mchog gi za-ma-tog ces-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00117, ff. 388a-451b of Vol. 7 [Ja] in the “Collection of Sutras” Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).   

S68
Haribhadra (Tib: Seng-ge bzang-po), @.  The Perfection of Wisdom in 25,000 Lines, (Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā) (Tib: Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa sTong-phrag nyi-shu-lnga-pa, titled in the native catalog to the Derge Tengyur with the more descriptive Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa sTong-phrag nyi-shu-lnga-pa mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan gyi rjes-su ‘brangs nas dag-par gtugs-pa: An Exhaustive Commentary to the “Perfection of Wisdom in 25,000 Lines” following the “Jewel of Realizations,” Tibetan translation at TD03790, in 3 parts, at Vols. 3, 4, & 5 [Ga, Nga, Ca] Perfection of Wisdom Section [Prajñāpāramitā, Shes-phyin] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S69
Asaṅga (Tib: Thogs-med), c. 350ad.  An Explanation of “The Higher Line, A Classical Commentary on the Greater Way” (Mahāyānottara Tantra Śāstra Vyākhyā) (Tib: Theg-pa chen-po rGyud bla-ma’i bstan-bcos rnam-par bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04025, ff. 74b-129a of Vol. 1 (Phi) of the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S70
Haribhadra (Seng-ge bzang-po), @.  An Illumination of the “Jewel of Realizations”: An Explanation of the Exalted Perfection of Wisdom in 8,000 Lines ([in situ:] Ārya Prajñāpāramitā Aṣṭasahasrikā Vyākhyā Abhisamayālaṃkāra Āloka) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa brGyad-stong-pa’i bshad-pa, mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan gyi snang-ba, Tibetan translation at TD03791, ff. 1b-341a of Vol. 6 (Cha) of the Perfection of Wisdom Section [Prajñāpāramitā, Shes-phyin] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S71
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Requested by Gagana Ganja (Ārya Gagana Gañja Paripṛccha Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Nam-mkha’ mdzod kyis zhus-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00148, ff. 319a-460b of Vol. 11 (Da) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).   

S72
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Perfection of Wisdom in 18,000 Lines (Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa Khri brgyad-stong-pa, Tibetan translation at KL00010, Vols. 1, 2, & 3 (Ka, Kha, Ga) of the Perfection of Wisdom in 18,000 Lines section of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).   

S73
Dīkṣita, Bhaṭṭoji.  Siddhānta Kaumadī (New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1962), with original Sanskrit verses and English translation, in two volumes: Vol. 1, 1028 pp.; Vol. 2, consisting of three additional original volumes paginated pp. 1-713 and then pp. 1-406 and finally pp. 1-247, with an additional appendix of 106pp.

S74
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Book of the Eon of Good Fortune (Ārya Bhadra Kalpika Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa bsKal-pa bzang-po zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00094, ff. 1a-548a of Vol. 1 (Ka) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).   

S75
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "Displaying Emanations to the Objects of the Activities of the Bodhisattvas, the Objects of their Skillful Means” (Ārya Bodhisattva Gocaropāya Viśaya Vikurvāṇa Nirdeśa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Byang-chub sems-dpa’i spyod-yul gyi thabs kyi yul la rnam-par ‘phrul-pa bstan-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00146, ff. 57a-153b of Vol. 11 (Da) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).   

S76
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Requested by Sagara Mati [Medium-Length Version] (Sa#garamati Paripṛcchā Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Klu’i rgyal-po rgya-mtsos zhus-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00154, ff. 180a-303a of Vol. 12 (Na) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).   

S77
Ratnadāsa* (Tib: dKon-mchog ‘bangs), @.  A Praise of the Good Qualities as Infinite (Guṇāparyantastotra) (Tib: Yon-tan mtha’-yas-par bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01155, ff. 196a-200b of Vol. 1 (Ka) in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S78
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “Manjushri’s Play” (Ārya Mañjuśrī Vikrīḍita Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa ‘Jam-dpal rnam-par rol-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00096, ff. 352a-391a of Vol. 2 (Kha) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S79
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Group of Teachings of the Bodhisattvas (Ārya Bodhisattva Piṭaka Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Byang-chub sems-dpa’i sde-snod ces-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00056, ff. 1b-380b of Vol. 3 (Ga) of the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratnakūṭa, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S80
Śūra (Tib: [sLob-dpon] dPa’-bo), @.  Words of Eloquence like a Chest of Jewels (Subhāṣita Ratna Karaṇḍaka Kathā) (Tib: Legs-par bshad-pa rin-po-che za-ma-tog lta-bu’i gtam, Tibetan translation at TD04168, ff. 178a-189b of Vol. 1 (Ge-2) in the Epistles Section [Lekha, sPring-yig] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S81
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Exalted Brief Presentation of the Perfection of Wisdom set in Verse (Ārya Prajñāpāramitā Sañcayagāthā) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa sdud-pa tsigs-su bcad-pa, Tibetan translation at KL00013, ff. 189a-215a of Vol. 1 (Ka) of the Other Teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Section [Sher-phyin sna-tsogs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S82
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “Everything There Is, Crushed to a Small Pile of Powder” (Ārya Sarva Vaidalya Saṃgraha Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa rNam-par ‘thag-pa thams-cad bsdus-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00227, ff. 287a-305b of Vol. 17 (Tza) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S83
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “A Teaching Given by Akshaya Mati, Never-Ending Wisdom” (Ārya Akṣayamati Nirdeśa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Blo-gros mi-zad-pas bstan-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00175, ff. 122b-270b of Vol. 14 (Pha) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S84
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), 350ad.  An Explanation of the “Treasure House of Higher Knowledge” (Abhidharmakoṣa Bhāśya) (Tib: Chos mngon-pa’i mdzod kyi bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04090, in two parts: ff. 26b-258a of Vol. 2 (Ku) and ff. 1b-95a of Vol. 62 (Khu) of the Higher Knowledge Section [Abhidharma, mNgon-pa] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S85
Mañjughoṣa Dignāga* (Tib: ‘Jam-dbyangs phyogs kyi glang-po), @.  Lamp on the Crucial Points: A Commentary upon Higher Knowledge (Abhidharma Marma Pradīpa Nāma Vṛtti) (Tib: Chos mngon-pa’i ‘grel-pa gNad kyi sgron-ma, Tibetan translation at TD04095, ff. 95b-214a of Vol. 9 (Nyu) of the Higher Knowledge Section [Abhidharma, mNgon-pa] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S86
Yaśomitra (Tib: Grags-pa’i bshes-gnyen), @.  A Commentary in Explanation of the “Treasure House of Higher Knowledge” (Abhidharma Koṣa Ṭīka) (Tib: Chos mngon-pa’i mdzod kyi ‘grel-bshad, Tibetan translation at TD04092, in two parts; ff. 1b-330a of Vol. 63 (Gu) and ff. 1b-333a of Vol. 5 (Ngu) of the Higher Knowledge Section [Abhidharma, mNgon-pa] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S87
Pūrṇavardhana (Tib: Gang-ba spel-ba), @.  A Commentary to the “Treasure House of Knowledge” which Follows the Various Definitions (Abhidharma Koṣa Ṭīka Lakṣanānusāriṇī) (Tib: Chos mngon-pa’i mdzod kyi ‘grel-bshad mtsan-nyid kyi rjes su ‘brang-ba, Tibetan translation at TD04093, in two parts; ff. 1b-347a of Vol. 6 (Cu) and ff. 1b-322a of Vol. 66 (Chu) of the Higher Knowledge Section [Abhidharma, mNgon-pa] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S88
Bhavya [Bhavaviveka] (Tib: Bha-bya).  The Blaze of Reasoning: A Commentary to “The Heart of the Middle Way” (Madhyāmakahṛdayavṛtti Tarkajvālā) (Tib: dBu-ma’i snying-po’i ‘grel-pa rTog-ge ‘bar-ba, Tibetan translation at TD03856, ff. 40b-329a of Vol. 3 (Dza) of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S89
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Work of the Greater Way entitled “The Sutra of the Essence of the Sky” (Ārya Ākāśagarbha Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Nam-mkha’i snying-po zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00260, ff. 30b-60b of Vol. 21 (Zha) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S90
Asaṅga (Tib: Thogs-med), c. 350ad.  “The Levels of the Bodhisattva,” a Section from “The Levels of an Accurate Practioner’s Activity” (Yogacaryābhūmisye bodhisattvabhūmi) (Tib: rNal-’byor spyod-pa’i sa las Byang-chub-sems-dpa’i sa, Tibetan translation at TD04037, ff. 1b-213a of Vol. 7 (Wi) of the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S91
Sagaramegha* (Tib: rGya-mtso sprin), @.  An Explication of “The Levels of the Bodhisattva,” a Section from “The Levels of an Accurate Practioner’s Activity” (Yogacaryābhūmisye Bodhisattvabhūmivyākhyā) (Tib: rNal-’byor spyod-pa’i sa las Byang-chub-sems-dpa’i sa’i rnam-par bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at TD04047, ff. 1b-338a of Vol. 11 (Yi) of the Mind Only Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S92
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “A Sprout of Rice” (Śālistambha Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: S’a-lu’i ljang-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00210, ff. 180a-192b of Vol. 16 (Ma) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S93
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Meeting of the Father & Son” (Ārya Pitāputra Samāgamana Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Yab dang sras mjal-ba zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00060, ff. 85a-358a of Vol. 4 (Nga) of the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratnakūṭa, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S94
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Praise of the Realm of Is (Dharmadhātu Stava) (Tib: Chos kyi dbyings su bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01118, ff. 63b-67b of Vol. 1 (Ka) in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S95
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc. An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “A Journey to Langka” (Ārya Laṅkāvatāra Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Langkar gshegs-pa’i theg-pa chen-po’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00107, ff. 87b-307a of Vol. 5 (Ca) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S96
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Highest Golden Light, King of Kings among All the Sutras There Are” (Ārya Suvarṇa Prabhāsottama Sūtrendrarāja Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa gSer-’od dam-pa mdo-sde’i dbang-po’i rgyal-po zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00556, ff. 215b-405b of Vol. 11 (Da) in the “Secret Teachings” Section [Tantra, rGyud] of the bKa’-’gyur [Lha-sa edition]).  There is a second, shorter version of the work immediately following: KL00557, ff. 405b-504a of the same volume; as well as another long version at KL00555, ff. 1b-215b of the volume.

S97
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc. An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Great Cloud” (Ārya Mahāmegha Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa sPrin chen-po zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00232, ff. 180a-337b of Vol. 18 (Tsa) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S98
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Exalted Root Secret Teaching of Gentle Voice, Manjushri (Ārya Mañjuśrī Mūla Tantra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa ‘Jam-dpal gyi rtza-ba’i rgyud) Tibetan translation at KL00543, ff. 53b-448b of Vol. 10 (Tha) in the “Secret Teachings” Section [Tantra, rGyud] of the bKa’-’gyur [Lha-sa edition]).

S99
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  The 100 Lines on Wisdom (Prajñāśatika) (Tib: Shes-rab brgya-pa) Tibetan translation at TD04328, ff. 99b-103a of Vol. 1 (Ngo-2) in the “Secular Topics” Section [Nītiśāstra, Lugs kyi bstan-bcos] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S100
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc. An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "The Section on Striking the Great Drum" (Ārya Mahābherī Hāraka Parivarta Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa rNga-bo-che chen-po’i le’u zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00222, ff. 141a-208b of Vol. 17 (Tza) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S101
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "The Section on the Emanation of Gentle Voice" (Ārya Mañjuśrī Vikurvāṇa Parivarta Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa ‘Jam-dpal rnam-par ‘phrul-pa’i le’u zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00097, ff. 391a-416a of Vol. 2 (Kha) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S102
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “Clearing Away the Guilt of Ajatashatru, the Unborn Enemy” (Ārya Ajātaśatru Kaukṛtya Vinodana Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Ma-skyes-dgra’i ‘gyod-pa bsal-ba zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00216, ff. 323a-413a of Vol. 16 (Ma) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]). 

S103
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), 350ad.  An Explication of the Exalted Book of the Ten Levels (Ārya Daśabhūmi Vyākhyāna) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Sa bcu-pa’i rnam-par bshad-pa) Tibetan translation at TD03993, ff. 103b-266a of Vol. 1 (Ngi) of the Commentaries on Sutras Section [Vṛtti, mDo-’grel] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

S104
Jñānagarbha (Tib: Ye-shes snying-po), @.  Distinguishing the Two Realities, a Work Set in Verse (Satya Dvaya Vibhaṃga Kārikā) (Tib: bDen-pa gnyis rnam-par ‘byed pa’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa), Tibetan translation at TD03881, ff. 1b-3b of Vol. 12 (Sa) of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S105
Śāntarakṣita (Tib: Zhi-ba ‘tso), f. 760ad.  A Commentary upon Difficult Points in “Distinguishing the Two Realities” (Satyadvaya Vibhaṃga Pañjika) (Tib: bDen-pa gnyis rnam-par-’byed pa’i dka’-’grel), Tibetan translation at TD03883, ff. 15b-52b of Vol. 12 (Sa) of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S106
Kamalaśīla (Tib: Ka-ma-la-sh’i-la), 775ad.  Light on the Middle Way (Madhyamakāloka) (Tib: dBu-ma snang-ba), Tibetan translation at TD03887, ff. 133b-244a of Vol. 12 (Sa) of the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S107
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Various Manifestations of the Single Nature of Things, the King of Concentration” (Ārya Sarva Dharma Svabhāva Samatā Vipañcita Samādhi Rāja Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Chos thams-cad kyi rang-bzhin mnyam-pa nyid rnam-par spros-pa Ting-nge-’dzin gyi rgyal-po zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo), Tibetan translation at KL00127, ff. 1b-269b of Vol. 9 (Ta) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S108
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  The Seventy Verses on Emptiness (Śūnyatā Saptati Kārikā) (Tib: sTong-pa-nyid bdun-cu-pa’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03827, ff. 24a-27a of Vol. 96 [Tza] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S109
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  Stopping All Argument (Vigraha Vyāvartanī Kārikā)  (Tib: rTzod-pa bzlog-pa’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03828, ff. 27a-29a of Vol. 1 [Tza] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S110
Śākyamati (Tib: Sh’akya’i blo), @.  An Explication of the “Commentary on Accurate Perception” (Pramāṇavartikātikā, Tibetan translation at TD04220, ff. 1b-328a of Vol. 3 [Je] and ff. 1b-282a of Vol. 4 [Nye] of the Valid-Perception Section [Pramāṇa, Tsad-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S111
Buddhaśānta (Tib: Sangs-rgyas zhi-ba), @.  A Commentary upon the “Praise of Confession” (Deśana Stava Vṛtti, Tibetan translation at TD01160, ff. 206b-229b of Vol. 1 (Ka) in the Collected Eulogies Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S112
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Perfection of Wisdom in 25,000 Lines (Pañca Viṃśati Sāhasrikā Prajñā Pāramitā) (Tib: Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa stong-phrag nyi-shu lnga-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00009, in three parts: ff. 1b–558a of Vol. 1 [Ka]; ff. 1b–548a of Vol. 2 [Kha]; and ff. 1b–537a of Vol. 3 [Ga] in the Perfection of Wisdom in 25,000 Lines Section [Pañca Viṃśati Sāhasrikā, Nyi-khri] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S113
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub) c. 200ad.  An Extensive Explanation of the Exalted “Sprout of Rice,” a Sutra of the Greater Way (Ārya Śālistambaka Mahāyāna Sūtra Ṭīkā) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa S’a-lu ljang-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo’i rgya-cher bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at  TD03986, ff. 20b-55b of Vol. 1 [Ngi] in the Commentaries to Sutras Section [Sūtra Vṛtti, mDo-’grel] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S114
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "A Description of Deceptive and Ultimate Realities” (Ārya Saṃvṛti Paramārtha Satya Nirdeśa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Kun-rdzob dang, don-dam-pa’i bden-pa bstan-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00179, ff. 384a-420b of Vol. 14 [Pha] of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).
   Also commonly known as The Sutra on Entering the Two Realities (bDen-pa gnyis la ‘jug-pa’i mdo).

S115
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “Playing Everywhere” (Ārya Lalita Vistāra Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa rGya-cher rol-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00095, ff. 1a-352a of Vol. 2 [Kha] of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S116
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), c. 350ad.  Reasoning in Explanation (Vyākhyā Yukti) (Tib: rNam-par bshad-pa’i rigs-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04061, ff. 29a–134b of Vol. 14 [Shi] in the Mind Only School Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S117
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “Moving Between Lives” (Ārya Bhava Saṃkranti Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Srid-pa ‘pho-ba zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00226, ff. 284a-287a of Vol. 17 [Tza] of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S118
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Requested by Sagara Mati (Ārya Sāgara Mati Paripṛcchā Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Blo-gros rgya-mtsos zhus-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00152, ff. 1b-180a of Vol. 12 [Na] of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S119
Kamalaśīla (Tib: Ka-ma-la-sh’i-la), c. 750ad.  A Detailed Commentary upon the Exalted Teaching on the Perfection of Wisdom entitled “The Diamond Cutter” (Ārya Prajñāpāramitā Vajracchedika Ṭīka) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa rDo-rje gcod-pa’i rgya-cher ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD03817, ff. 204-267 of Vol. 16 [Ma] in the “Perfection of Wisdom” Section [Prajñā Pāramitā, Sher-phyin] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  A translation of this work is being prepared in the current Diamond Cutter Classics Series.

S120
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Entitled “Acting in Accord with the World” (Ārya Lokānusamāna Avatāra Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa ‘Jig-rten gyi rjes su mthun-par ‘jug-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00200, ff. 478b-486a of Vol. 15 [Ba] of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S121
Asaṅga (Tib: Thogs-med), 350ad.  A Summary of the Collection of Sutras, from the Summary of the Foundations, within the “Levels of Deep Practice” (Yogacaryābhūmau Vastusaṃgrahe Sūtrasaṃgraha*) (Tib: rNal-’byor spyod-pa’i sa las gZhi bsdu-ba’i nang gi mDo-sde bsdu-ba, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04039, ff. 127a–335a of Vol. 9 [Zi] of the Mind Only School Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S122
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByigs-gnyen), c. 350ad.  An Expanded Explanation of the Presentation of the First Principle and Divisions of How Things Occur in Interdependence (Pratītya Samutpādādivibhaṃgha Nirdeśasya Ṭīkā) (Tib: rTen cing ‘brel-bar ‘byung-ba dang-po dang rnam-par dbye-ba bstan-pa’i rgya-cher bshad-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03996, ff. 61b-234a of Vol. 3 [Chi] in the Commentaries on Sutras Section [Vṛtti, mDo-’grel] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S123
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByigs-gnyen), c. 350ad.  A Commentary upon “Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes” (Madhyānta Vibhaṅga Ṭīka) (Tib: dBus dang mtha’ rnam-par ‘byed-pa’i ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04027, ff. 1b–27a of Vol. 2 [Bi] of the Mind Only School Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S124
Sthiramati (Tib: Blo-brtan), c. 550ad.  An Explication of “Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes” (Madhyānta Vibhaṅga Ṭīka) (Tib: dBus dang mtha’ rnam-par ‘byed-pa’i ‘grel-bshad, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04032, ff. 189b–318a of Vol. 2 [Bi] of the Mind Only School Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S125
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Requested by Purna (Ārya Pūrṇa Paripṛcchā Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Gang-pos zhus-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at KL00061, ff. 358a-458b of Vol. 4 [Nga] in the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratnakūta, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S126
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Glorious Secret Collection, King of All the Teachings of the Secret (Śrī Guhya Samāja Mahātantra Rāja Nāma) (Tib: dPal gSang-ba ‘dus-pa zhes-bya-ba rgyud kyi rgyal-po chen-po, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00442, ff. 431b–521b of Vol. 4 [Nga] in the Secret Teachings Section [Tantra, rGyud] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).  Note that this work does not correspond exactly to the version found in the Derge edition, under the same catalog number.

S127
Niḥsvabhāva* (Tib: Ngo-bo-nyid med-pa), c. @.  An Explication of the “Summary of the Greater Way” (Mahāyāna Saṃgrahopanibandhana) (Tib: Theg-pa chen-po bsdus-pa’i bshad-sbyar, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04051, ff. 190b–296a of Vol. 12 [Ri] in the Mind Only School Section [Cittamatra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S128
Jñānagarbha (Tib: Ye-shes snying-po), c. @.  A Commentary upon “Distinguishing Between the Two Realities” (Satya Dvaya Vibhaṃga Vṛtti) (Tib: bDen-pa gnyis rnam-par ‘byed-pa’i ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD03882, ff. 3b-15b of Vol. 12 [Sa] in the in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S129
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Commentary to “Stopping All Argument” (Vigraha Vyāvartanī Vṛtti)  (Tib: rTzod-pa bzlog-pa’i ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03832, ff. 121a-137a of Vol. 1 [Tza] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S130
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), 350ad.  The Thirty Verses (Triṃśikā Kārikā) (Tib: Sum-cu-pa’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04055, Vol. 14 [Shi], ff. 1b–3a, in the Mind Only School Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S131
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "A Presentation of the Three Vows," a Section within the Hundred Thousand Iterations of the Dharma known as "The Great Pile of Rare and Precious Jewels" (Ārya Mahāratnakūṭa Dharmaparyāya Śatasāhasrika Granthe Trisaṃvara Nirdeśa Parivartana Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa dKon-mchog brtzegs-pa chen-po’i chos kyi rnam-grangs stong-phrag brgya-pa las, sDom-pa gsum bstan-pa’i le’u zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00045, ff. 1b–68b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratnakūṭa, Dkon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [Lha-sa edition]).

S132
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), 350ad.  A Commentary to “The Twenty Verses” (Viṃśaka Vṛtti) (Tib: Nyi-shu-pa’i ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04057, Vol. 14 [Shi], ff. 4a–10a, in the Mind Only School Section [Cittamātra, Sems-tzam] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S133
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Lady of Conquest, the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom (Bhagavatī Prajñā Pāramitā Hṛdaya) (Tib: bCom-ldan-’das-ma shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa’i snying-po, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00531, ff. 45a–47a of Vol. 10 [Tha] of the Secret Teachings Section [Tantra, rGyud] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S134
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc. The Section Known as “The Essence of the Speech of Each & Every Enlightened One,” from that Exalted Sutra, the Precious “Journey to Langka” (no Sanskrit title in situ) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Langkar gshegs-pa rin-po-che’i mdo las, Sangs-rgyas thams-cad kyi gsung gi snying-po zhes-bya-ba’i le’u) Tibetan translation at KL00108, ff. 307a-462a of Vol. 5 (Ca) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S135
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "Unraveling the True Thought” (Ārya Saṃdhi Nirmocana Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa dGongs-pa nges-par ‘grel-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00106, ff. 1b-87b of Vol. 5 (Ca) in the Sutra Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).  We commonly render the title, following the ancient Tibetan translators, as What I Really Meant.

S136
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc. An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “The Paradise of the Clouds” (Ārya Ghana Vyūha Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa rGyan stug-po bkod-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00110, ff. 1b-86a of Vol. 6 (Cha) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S137
Āryadeva (Tib: ‘Phags-pa lha), c. 230ad.  A Compendium of the Essence of Wisdom (Jñāna Sāra Samuccaya Nāma)  (Tib: Ye-shes snying-po kun las btus-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03851, ff. 26b-28a of Vol. 2 [Tsa] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S138
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  A Sutra entitled “The First Principle and Divisions of How Things Occur in Interdependence” (Pratītya Samutpādivibhaṃgha Nirdeśa Nāma Sūtra) (Tib: rTen cing ‘brel-par ‘byung-ba dang-po dang, rnam-par dbye-ba bstan-pa zhes-bya-ba’i mdo) Tibetan translation at KL00211, ff. 192b-195a of Vol. 16 (Ma) of the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S139
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Requested by Anavatapta, King of the Water Dragons (Ārya Anavatapta Nāga Rāja Paripṛcchā Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Klu’i rgyal-po Ma-dros-pas zhus-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00156, ff. 314a-383a of Vol. 12 (Na) in the Sutra Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S140
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "A Presentation of the Inconceivable Secret of Those Gone Thus" (Ārya Tathāgatācintya Guhya Nirdeśa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa De-bzhin-gshegs-pa’i gsang-ba bsam gyis mi-khyab-pa bstan-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00047, ff. 151a-313b of Vol. 1 (Ka) in the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratna Kūṭa, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S141
Īśvarakṛṣṇa (Tib: dBang-phyug nag-po), c. 350ad.  Verses on the Numerists (Sāṃkhya Kārikā).  “Isvarakrsna: Samkhyakarika (Samkhyasaptati) [sic],” GRETIL (Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages), http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/6_sastra/3_phil/samkhya/iskar_u.htm, accessed January 6, 2018.

S142
Vairocana Rakṣita (Tib: Bee-ro-tza-na Rakṣhi-ta), c. 750ad.  An Explanation of Difficult Points in “A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life” (Bodhisattva Caryāvatāra Pañjikā) (Tib: Byang- chub sems-dpa’i spyod-pa la ‘jug-pa’i dka’-’grel, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD03875A, ff. 95b–159a of Vol. 11 [Sha] in the Middle Way School Section [Madhyamaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S143
(Śrī) Vibhūti Candra (Tib: (Slob-dpon) rNam-grol zla-ba), c. @ad.  An Illumination of Special Points: A Commentary upon the True Thought of the “Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life” (Bodhicaryāvatāra Tātparyapañjikā Viśeṣa Dyotanī) (Tib: Byang-chub kyi spyod-pa la ‘jug-pa’i dgongs-pa’i ‘grel-pa Khyad-par gsal-byed, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD03880, ff. 192b–285a of Vol. 11 [Sha] in the Middle Way School Section [Madhyamaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S144
Dharmatrātra (Tib: Chos-skyob), c. 200ad.  A Collection of Tailored Teachings (Udānavarga) (Tib: Ched du brjod-pa’i tsoms, Tibetan translation [one of two] at ACIP KL00326, ff. 320b–387b of Vol. 26 [La] in the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S145
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Divisions of Vowed Morality (Vinaya Vibhaṃga) (Tib: ‘Dul-ba rnam-par ‘byed-pa, Tibetan translation in four parts: ACIP KL00003-1, ff. 30a–413a of Vol. 5 [Ca]; ACIP KL00003-2, ff. 1b–402a of Vol. 6 [Cha]; ACIP KL00003-3, ff. 1a–423a of Vol. 7 [Ja]; and ACIP KL00003-4, ff. 1a–386a of Vol. 8 [Nya] in the Vowed Morality Section [Vinaya, ‘Dul-ba] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S146
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled “An Explanation to Nanda of How a Child Comes in the Womb” (Ārya Nanda Garbhāvakrānti Nirdeśa Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa dGa’-bo la mngal na gnas-pa bstan-pa zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00057, ff. 399b-448a of Vol. 3 (Ga) in the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratna Kūṭa, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S147
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Exalted Perfection of Wisdom in 8,000 Lines (Ārya Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñā Pāramitā) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa brGyad-stong-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00012, ff. 1b-450a of Vol. 1 (Ka) in the Perfection of Wisdom in 8,000 Lines Section [Aṣṭasāhasrikā, brGyad-stong] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S148
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Exalted Perfection of Wisdom in 10,000 Lines (Ārya Daśasāhasrikā Prajñā Pāramitā) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa Khri-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00011, in two parts: Part 1, ff. 317a-456a of Vol. 3 (Ga) of the Perfection of Wisdom in 18,000 Lines Section [Aṣṭādaśasāhasrika, Khri brgyad stong-pa]; and Part 2, ff. 1a-460a of Vol. 1 (Ka) of the Perfection of Wisdom in 10,000 Lines Section [Daśasāhasrikā, Khri-pa] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S149
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way Entitled “The Lion’s Roar of the Goddess Shrimala” (Ārya Śrīmāla Devī Siṃha Nāda Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa lHa-mo dpal-phreng gi seng-ge’i sgra zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00092, ff. 418a–454a of Vol. 6 [Cha] in the Pile of Jewels Section [Ratna Kūṭa, dKon-brtzegs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S150
Abhayākaragupta (Tib: ‘Jigs-med ‘byung-gnas sbas-pa), @.  The Jewel of the True Thought of the Able Ones (Muni Mata Ālaṃkāra) (Tib: Thub-pa’i dgongs-pa’i rgyan, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD03903, ff. 73b-293a of Vol. 14 [Aa] in the Middle Way School Section [Madhyamaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S151
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Sutra of the Greater Way entitled "The Unstoppable Wheel” (Ārya Vaivarta Cakra Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Phyir mi-ldog-pa’i ‘khor-lo zhes-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00240, ff. 371b-465a of Vol. 19 [Dza] in the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S152
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Shining Jewel of the Wisdom of the Buddhas Which Reaches All Things (Ārya Sarva Buddha Viśayāvatāra Jñānālokālaṃkara Nāma Mahāyāna Sūtra) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Sangs-rgyas thams-cad kyi yul la ‘jug-pa’i ye-shes snang-ba’i rgyan ces-bya-ba theg-pa chen-po’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00100, ff. 483a-535a of Vol. 3 [Ga] in the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S153
Candrakīrti (Tib: Zla-ba grags-pa), c. 625ad.  The Seventy Verses on Going for Refuge to the Three (Triśaraṇa Saptati) (Tib: gSum la skyabs su ‘gro-ba bdun-cu-pa, Tibetan translation at TD03971, ff. 251a-253b of Vol. 17 [Gi] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]). 

S154
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A Praise of That Which is Beyond All Comparison (Nirupama Stava) (Tib: dPe med-par bstod-pa, Tibetan translation at TD01119, ff. 67b-68b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Songs of Praise Section [Stotra, bsTod-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S155
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  An Exalted Teaching Entitled “The Awarenesses of Pure Reality” (Ārya Saddharma Smṛtyupasthāna) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa dam-pa’i chos dran-pa nye-bar gzhag-pa, Tibetan translation in four volumes: ACIP KL00287-1, ff. 171a–516a of Vol. 22 [Za]; ACIP KL00287-2, ff. 1b–478a of Vol. 23 [‘A]; ACIP KL00287-3, ff. 1b–521a of Vol. 24 [Ya]; and ACIP KL00287-4, ff. 1b–355b of Vol. 25 [Ra] in the Collection of Sutras Section [Sūtra, mDo-mang] of the bKa’-‘gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S156
Karmavajra* (Tib: Las kyi rdo-rje), @.  A Massive Commentary to the Sutra entitled “Obliterating the Galaxy” (Mahāsāhasra Pramardanī Śata Sahasra Ṭīkā) (Tib: sTong chen-po rab tu 'joms-pa'i mdo'i 'bum 'grel-pa, Tibetan translation at TD02690, ff. 1b-93a of Vol. 71 [Du] of the Secret Teachings Section [Tantra, rGyud] of the bsTan-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S157
Nāgārjuna (Tib: Klu-sgrub), c. 200ad.  A String of Precious Jewels (Ratna Māli) (Tib: Rin-po-che’i phreng-ba, Tibetan translation at TD03901, ff. 67a-72a of Vol. 14 [Aa] in the Middle Way Section [Madhyāmaka, dBu-ma] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S158
Kalyāṇamitra (Tib: dGe-legs bshes-gnyen), @.  An Extensive Commentary on the Foundations of Vowed Morality (Vinaya Vastu Ṭīkā) (Tib: ’Dul-ba gzhi rgya-cher ‘grel-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04113, ff. 177a-326a in Vol. 7 [Tzu] in the Vowed Morality Section [Vinaya, ‘Dul-ba] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S159
Śākyamuni Buddha (Tib: Sh’akya thub-pa), 500bc.  The Sutra on the Excellent Turning of the Wheel of the Dharma (Dharma Cakra Pravartana Sūtra) (Tib: Chos kyi ‘khor-lo rab tu bskor-ba’i mdo, Tibetan translation at ACIP KL00031, ff. 268a-273b of Vol. 1 [Ka] in the Other Teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Section [Citra Prajñā Pāramitā*, Sher-phyin sna-tsogs] of the bKa’-’gyur [lHa-sa edition]).

S160
Vīryasiṃha (Tib: B'irya sing-ha), @.  A Commentary upon the Secret Book Relating the Stories of Successive Births (Jātaka Mālasya Pañjikā) (Tib: sKyes pa'i rabs kyi rgyud kyi dka'-'grel-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD04460, ff. 275b-312b of Vol. 9 [Po] in the Miscellany Section [Citra, sNa-tsogs] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).

S161	
Vasubandhu (Tib: dByig-gnyen), 350ad.  A Detailed Commentary on the Sutra Taught by the Higher Being named “Never-Ending Wisdom” (Ārya Akṣayamati Nirdeśa Ṭīkā) (Tib: ‘Phags-pa Blo-gros mi-zad-pas bstan-pa rgya-cher 'grel-pa, Tibetan translation at ACIP TD03994, ff. 1b-269a of Vol. 2 [Ci] in the Commentaries on Sutras Section [Vṛtti, mDo-’grel] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).



Bibliography of Works
Originally Written in Tibetan

B1
(lCang-skya) Rol-pa’i rdo-rje, 1717-1786.  Part Three of “The Lovely Jewel for the Mountain Peak of the Teachings of the Able One”: A Clear Survey of the Schools of Philosophy (Grub-pa’i mtha’i rnam-par bzhag-pa gsal-bar bshad-pa Thub-bstan lhun-po’i mdzes-rgyan zhes-bya-ba las sde-tsan gsum-pa, lCang-skya grub-mtha’ las sde-tsan gsum pa, ACIP S00062), ff. 1a–79a.

B2
rJe Tzong-kha-pa (Blo-bzang grags-pa), 1357–1419.  A Commentary, with Additional Annotations, which Reveals the Meaning of the Wording of the “Clear Lamp,” itself an Extensive Explanation of the King of All Secret Teachings, the Glorious Secret Collection (rGyud thams-cad kyi rgyal-po dpal gSang-ba ‘dus-pa’i rgya-cher bshad-pa sGron-ma gsal-ba’i tsig-don ji-bzhin ‘byed-pa’i mtsan gyi yang-’grel, ACIP S05282), ff. 1a–476a.

B3
‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa’i rdo-rje, 1648-1721.  Entry Point for Those of Great Virtue: A Detailed Analysis of “Entering the Middle Way” which is a Veritable Treasure Trove of Scriptural Reference and Reasoning that Clarifies Every Profound Point of the Work (dBu-ma ‘jug-pa’i mtha’-dpyod lung-rigs gter-mdzod zab-don kun-gsal sKal-bzang ‘jug-ngogs, ACIP S13000), ff. 1a–442a.

B4
Pha-bong kha-pa bDe-chen snying-po, 1878-1941.  The Key that Opens the Door to the Excellent Path: Notes of an Explanation Granted when the Holder of the Diamond, the Good and Glorious Pabongka, Granted Profound Teachings upon "The Three Principal Paths” (rDo-rje ‘chang Pha-bong kha-pa dpal bzang-pos Lam-gtzo’i zab-khrid stzal skabs kyi gsung-bshad zin-bris Lam-bzang sgo-’byed, ACIP S00034), ff. 1a-41a.

B5
(Co-ne bla-ma) Grags-pa bshad-sgrub, 1675-1748.  The Sun that Illuminates the True Intent of the Entire Mass of Realized Beings, the Victors and All Their Sons & Daughters: A Commentary upon the “Treasure House of Higher Knowledge” (Chos-mngon mdzod kyi t’ikka rGyal-ba sras bcas ‘phags-tsogs thams-cad kyi dgongs-don gsal-bar byed-pa’i nyi-ma Co-ne mdzod, ACIP S00027), ff. 1a-211a.

B6
(Paṇ-chen bla-ma sku-phreng dang-po) Blo-bzang chos kyi rgyal-mtsan, 1570-1662.  "The Explication of the First Chapter," Part of "The Ocean of Fine Explanation, which Clarifies the Essence of the Essence of the ‘Jewel of Realizations,’ a Classical Commentary of Advices on the Perfection of Wisdom” (Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa’i man-ngag gi bstan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan gyi snying-po’i snying-po gsal-bar Legs-par bshad-pa’i rgya-mtso las sKabs dang-po’i rnam-par bshad-pa, ACIP S05942), 41ff.

B7
rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  The Illumination of the True Thought, an Explanation of the Magnificent Classical Commentary entitled “Entering the Middle Way” (bsTan-bcos chen-po dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i rnam-bshad dGongs-pa rab-gsal, ACIP S05408).  We reference three editions: the Kumbum (sKu-’bum), at SK05408, 303ff; the Trashi Hlunpo (bKra-shis lhun-po), at ST05408, 288ff; and the Guru Deva Shol, at SA05408, 267ff.

B8
N.a.  An Abbreviated Catalog of the Individual Works found in the Precious Kangyur, the Word of the Victorious Buddha [Native Catalog to the Lhasa Edition of the Kangyur] (rGyal-ba’i bKa’-’gyur rin-po-che’i chos-tsan so-so’i mtsan-byang dkar-chag bsdus-pa, ACIP KL04568), 49ff.

B9
(Paṇ-chen bla-ma sku-phreng gsum-pa) dPal-ldan ye-shes, 1738-1780.  The Precious Vase of Deathless Nectar for Helping Others: A Dissection Instruction on the Steps of Enlightenment (Byang-chub lam gyi rim-pa’i dmar-khrid gZhan-phan bdud-rtzi’i bum-pa, ACIP S12230), 16ff.

B10
(rGyal-ba) dGe-’dun grub, 1391-1474.  Illumination of the Path to Freedom: An Explanation of the Holy “Treasure House of Higher Knowledge” (Dam-pa’i Chos-mngon-pa mdzod kyi rnam-par bshad-pa Thar-lam gsal-byed, ACIP SE05525), 205ff.

B11
(mKhas-grub) bsTan-pa dar-rgyas, 1493-1568.  A Lamp for Those of Clear Minds: An Overview of the Great Classical Commentary known as Entering the Middle Way, and an Illumination of the True Thought of Illumination of the True Thoughts (bsTan-bcos chen-po dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i spyi-don rnam-bshad dGongs-pa rab-gsal gyi dgongs-pa gsal-bar byed-pa’i Blo-gsal sgron-me, ACIP S00021), 162ff.

B12
(lCang-skya sku-phreng dang-po) Ngag-dbang blo-bzang chos-ldan, 1642-1714.  An Easy Path to Omniscience: Verses of Instruction on the Steps of the Path to Enlightenment (Byang-chub lam gyi rim-pa’i gdams-pa’i tsigs-su-bcad-pa Kun-mkhyen bde-lam, ACIP S00464), 197 ff.

B13
rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  The Great Book on the Steps of the Path (Lam-rim chen-mo, ACIP S05392), 523ff.

B14
(Co-ne bla-ma) Grags-pa bshad-sgrub, 1675-1748.  The Sun that Illuminates the Profound Meaning of the Excellent Path for Travelling to Freedom: A Commentary on “The Diamond Cutter Sutra” (rDor-gcod kyi ‘grel-pa Thar-par bgrod-pa’i lam-bzang zab-don, ACIP ST00024), 44 ff.
   Translated & published in the Diamond Cutter Classics Series as Sunlight on the Path to Freedom: A Commentary to the Diamond Cutter Sutra (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2020), 508pp.

B15
(Paṇ-chen bla-ma sku-phreng dang-po) Blo-bzang chos kyi rgyal-mtsan, 1570-1662.  A Party to Open Up Excellent Things: An Explanation of “The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment” (Byang-chub lam gyi sgron-ma’i rnam-bshad Phul-byung bzhad-pa’i dga’-ston, ACIP S05941), 54 ff.

B16
dNgul-chu Dharma Bhadra, 1772-1851.  The "Treasure House of Precious Jewels": Notes to the "Dissection" Instruction for the Steps of the Path to Buddhahood entitled "The Path to Bliss, for Travelling to Omniscience"(Byang-chub lam gyi rim-pa’i dmar-’khrid Thams-cad mkhyen-par bgrod-pa’i bde-lam gyi zin-bris Rin-chen bang-mdzod, ACIP S06419), 133 ff.

B17
(Co-ne bla-ma) Grags-pa bshad-sgrub, 1675-1748.  A Brief Essence of All the Schools of Philosophy (Grub-mtha’ thams-cad kyi snying-po bsdus-pa, ACIP S25008), ff. 1a–31b.
   This text has been translated and published into English in the current Diamond Cutter Classics Series as Great Ideas of the East: A Survey of 101 Enlightening Belief Systems from Ancient Asia, transl. Ben Kramer & Geshe Michael Roach (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2023).

B18
(sGom-sde) Nam-mkha’ rgyal-mtsan, 1532-1592.  “The True Thought of Master Chandrakirti,” also known as “The Entry Point for Those who Seek for Freedom”: An Explication upon that Great Classical Treatise called “Entering the Middle Way” (bsTan-bcos chen-po dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i rnam-bshad Thar-’dod ‘jug-ngogs zhes-bya-ba la, Zla-ba’i dgongs-rgyan, ACIP S01001), 132ff.

B19
(Se-ra) rje-btzun Chos kyi rgyal-mtsan, 1469–1546.  The Excellent Explanation, a Sea of Sport for Those Fortunate Lords of the Serpentines, Written in Clarification of Difficult Points Found in the Two Treatises upon the “Jewel of Realizations" and Its Commentary (bsTan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan ‘grel-pa dang bcas-pa’i rnam-bshad rnam-pa gnyis kyi dka’-ba’i gnad gsal-bar byed-pa Legs-bshad skal-bzang klu-dbang gi rol-mtso, ACIP S06814, in 11 volumes: Vol. 1 (on first part of Chapter 1), ff. 1a–165b (but input incomplete); Vol. 2 (on second part of Chapter 1), ff. 1a–45a; Vol 3 (on the path of preparation), ff. 1a–28a; Vol. 4 (on the attainment of armor and further topics, incomplete); Vol. 5 (on Ch. 2, incomplete); Vol. 6 (on Ch. 3), ff. 1a–25b; Vol. 7 (on Ch. 4, incomplete); Vol. 8 (on Ch. 5), ff. 1a–37a; Vol. 9 (on Ch. 6), ff. 1a–5a; Vol. 10 (on Ch. 7), ff. 1a–7a; Vol 11 (on Ch. 8), ff. 1a–67a.

B20
Various authors.  An Illumination of the Liturgical Works which Constitute the Recitations for Sera Jey, a Monastery Famed for Its Great Masters (Ser-byes mkhas-snyan grva-tsang gi zhal-’don chos-spyod rab-gsal, ACIP S00212), ff. 1a-209b.

B21
Various authors.  A Compendium of Liturgical Texts Utilized at the Various Major Monasteries, along with Liturgical Works which are Unique to Sera Mey Monastery and Needed for Use by Its Members (Chos-sde chen-po rnams su gsung-pa’i chos-spyod kyi rim-pa dang Ser-smad thos-bsam nor-gling grva-tsang gi thun-mong-ma-yin-pa’i nye-mkho chos-spyod bcas, ACIP S00207), ff. 1a-228a + 34ff.

B22
(dGe-bshes Gro-lung-pa) Blo-gros ‘byung-gnas, c. 1100ad.  An Explanation of the Steps to the Path for Entering into the Precious Teachings of Those Who Have Gone to Bliss (bDe-bar gshegs-pa’i bstan-pa rin-po-che la ‘jug-pa’i lam gyi rim-pa rnam-par bshad-pa) [popular title: The Great Book on the Steps to the Teaching (bsTan-rim chen-mo)], in two parts (ACIP SE0070-1 and ACIP SE0070-2), folios 1a-295b and folios 296a-548a, respectively.

B23
(mKhas-grub) bsTan-pa dar-rgyas, 1493–1568.  An Illumination of the “Jewel of the Essence of Good Explanation”—an Overview of the Root Text and Commentary to the Classical Commentary Known as “The Jewel of Realizations” (bsTan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan rtza-’grel gyi spyi-don rNam-bshad snying-po rgyan gyi snang-ba phar-phyin spyi-don, ACIP S00009), in 6 volumes: Vol. 1 (commentary to the first chapter), ACIP SL00009-1, ff. 1a–141a; Vol. 2 (second chapter), ACIP S00009-2, ff. 1a–37a; Vol. 3 (third chapter), ACIP S00009-3, ff. 1a–15a; Vol. 4 (fourth chapter), ACIP S00009-4, ff. 1a–65a; Vol. 5 (fifth through seventh chapters), ACIP S00009-5, ff. 1a–21a; and Vol. 6 (eighth chapter), ACIP S00009-6, ff. 1a–24a.

B24
(T’a-la’i sku-phreng dang-po) (rGyal-ba) dGe-’dun grub, 1391-1474.  An Illumination of the Path to Freedom: An Explanation of the Holy “Treasure House of Higher Knowledge” (Dam-pa’i Chos mngon-pa’i mdzod kyi rnam-par bshad-pa Thar-lam gsal-byed, ACIP SE05525), ff. 1a-205b.

B25
rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  The Ocean of Reasoning, an Explication of the Root Verses on the Middle Way entitled “Wisdom” (dBu-ma rtza-ba’i tsig-le’ur byas-pa Shes-rab ces-bya-ba’i rnam-bshad Rigs-pa’i rgya-mtso, ACIP S05401), ff. 1a-280b.

B26
(Zhu-chen) Tsul-khrims rin-chen, 1697-1774.  A New Moon which Raises the Treasure of the Waters of Wondrous Discussion, through the Gathering of Vast Mountains of Clouds, and the Goodness of Those of the Eon in which Virtues are Completed, the Mother of All Incredible Machines, the Never-Ending Shower of the Gift of the Teachings—All You Could Wish for, of the Entire Body of the Classical Commentaries which Illuminate Each & Every Thought within the Holy Word, both General and More Specific, of the Mighty and All-Knowing One, the Friend of the Sun [Lord Buddha]; and Which Have Been Translated into the Language of the People of the Land of Snows [Native Catalog to the Derge Edition of the Tengyur] (Thams-cad mkhyen-pa chen-po Nyi-ma’i gnyen gyi bka’-lung spyi dang bye-brag gi dgongs-don ma-lus-pa rnam-par ‘grel-pa’i bstan-bcos gangs-can-pa’i skad du ‘gyur-ro ‘tsal gyi chos-sbyin rgyun mi-’chad-pa’i ngo-mtsar ‘phrul gyi phyi-mo rdzogs-ldan bskal-pa’i bsod-nams kyi sprin-phung rgyas-par dkrigs-pa’i tsul las brtzams-pa’i gtam ngo-mtsar chu-gter ‘phel-ba’i zla-ba gsar-pa, [sDe-dge bsTan-’gyur rang gi dkar-chag] composed in 1743, ACIP TD04569), ff. 337a-468b of Vol. Shri [concluding volume] of the bsTan-’gyur [sDe-dge edition]).  

B27
rGyal-tsab rje Dar-ma rin-chen, 1364-1432.  The Essence of an Ocean of Fine Explanation for Higher Knowledge: An Explication of the “Compendium of All the Teachings on Higher Knowledge” (mNgon-pa kun las btus-pa’i rnam-bshad Legs-par bshad-pa’i chos-mngon rgya-mtso’i snying-po, ACIP S05435), ff. 1a-215b.

B28
rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  A Medium-Length Book on the Steps of the Path (Lam-rim ‘bring; also called A Briefer Book on the Steps of the Path [Lam-rim chung-ngu], ACIP S05393), ff. 1a-219b.

B29
dNgul-chu Dharma Bhadra, 1772-1851.  The Maker of Day, which Illuminates the True Thought of Lobsang: A Commentary on “The Essence of the Ocean of Discipline” (‘Dul-ba rgya-mtso’i snying-po’i ṭ’i ka Blo-bzang dgongs-don gsal-ba’i nyin-byed, ACIP S06361), ff. 1a-13a.

B30
(rGyal-dbang) Blo-bzang ‘phrin-las rnam-rgyal, fl. 1825.  Light on the Lord of the Makers of Day, Words of Excellent Explanation: An Explication of the True Intent of “The Treasure House of Higher Knowledge” (Chos mngon-pa’i mdzod kyi dgongs-don gsal-bar byed-pa’i Legs-bshad nyin-byed dbang-po’i snang-ba, ACIP S00044), in eight volumes: Vol. 1 (ff. 1a–31a), Vol. 2 (ff. 1a–65a), Vol. 3 (ff. 1a–29b), Vol. 4 (ff. 1a–49b), Vol. 5 (ff. 1a–27b), Vol. 6 (ff. 1a–56b), Vol. 7 (ff. 1a–37b), Vol. 8 (ff. 1a–41a).

B31
(sKyabs-rje) Pha-bong-kha-pa bDe-chen snying-po, 1878-1941.  Notes Taken on the Occasion of a Profound Teaching on the “Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life” (Byang-chub sems-dpa’i spyod-pa la ‘jug-pa’i zab-khrid nos skabs kyi zin-bris, ACIP S00362), ff. 1a-36a.

B32
(T’a-la’i sku-phreng dang-po rGyal-ba) dGe-’dun rgya-mtso, 1476-1542.  A Lamp that Illuminates, with Total Clarity, the True Intent: A Commentary on Difficult Points in “Distinguishing between the Figurative and the Literal,” found in the Collected Works of the Holy and Omniscient One [Je Tsongkapa] (rJe-btzun thams-cad mkhyen-pa’i gsung-’bum las Drang-nges rnam-’byed kyi dka’-’grel dGongs-pa’i don rab-tu gsal-bar byed-pa’i sgron-me, ACIP SE00565), ff. 1a-106a.

B33
Pha-bong kha-pa bDe-chen snying-po, 1878-1941.  “A Gift of Liberation, Thrust into the Palm of Your Hand; the Heart of the Nectar of Holy Advices; the Very Essence of All the Highest of Spoken Words," representing Profound, Complete, and Unerring Instruction taken down as Notes during a Teaching, of the Kind Based on Personal Experience, on the Steps of the Path to Enlightenment, the Heart-Essence of the Incomparable King of the Dharma (rNam-grol lag-bcangs su gtod-pa’i man-ngag zab-mo tsang la ma-nor-ba mtsungs-med chos kyi rgyal-po’i thugs-bcud byang-chub lam gyi rim-pa’i nyams-khrid kyi zin-bris gsung-rab kun gyi bcud-bsdus gdams-ngag bdud-rtzi’i snying-po Lam-rim rnam-grol lag-bcangs, ACIP S00004), ff. 1a-392a.

B34
(bKa’-chen) Blo-bzang bzod-pa, d. 1995.  The Ultimate Jewel for Those Who Teach Using Scriptural Authority and Reasoning: A Commentary to the Root Text on the Collected Topics of Logic and Perceptual Theory (bsDus-rtza’i ‘grel-pa lung-rigs smra-ba’i rgyan-mchog, ACIP S00978), ff. 1a-238b.

B35
(dMu-dge) bSam-gtan rgya-mtso, 1914-1993.  A Brief Account of How the Arts of Knowledge Spread in Tibet (Bod du rig-gnas dar-tsul mdor-bsdus bshad-pa, ACIP S12339), pp. 384-463.

B36
(mKhas-grub) bsTan-pa dar-rgyas, 1493-1568.  A Garland of White Lotuses for the “Essence of Eloquence”: An Overview of the Art of Interpretation (Drang-nges rnam-’byed kyi spyi-don Legs-par bshad-pa’i snying-po Pad-ma dkar-po’i ‘phreng-ba drang-nges spyi-don, ACIP S00010), ff. 1a-18a.

B37
(T’a-la’i sku-phreng lnga-pa, lNga-pa chen-po, rGyal-ba) Ngag-dbang blo-bzang rgya-mtso, 1617-1682.  The Word of Gentle Voice: A Book of Instructions upon the Steps of the Path to Enlightenment (Byang-chub lam gyi rim-pa’i ‘khrid-yig ‘Jam-pa’i dbyangs kyi zhal-lung, ACIP S05637), ff. 1a-95a.

B38
Bu-ston Rin-chen grub, 1290-1364.  The Golden Harvest of the Word: An Expanded Presentation in Explanation of that Classical Commentary upon the Perfection of Wisdom entitled “The Jewel of Realizations” (Shes-rab kyi pha-rol-tu phyin-pa’i man-ngag gi bstan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan zhes-bya-ba’i ‘grel-pa rgya-cher bshad-pa Lung gi snye-ma, ACIP S05173), ff. 1a-363a.

B39
(‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa sku-phreng dang-po) ‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa’i rdo-rje Ngag-dbang brtzon-’grus, 1648-1721.  The String of Jewels that Grant Your Every Wish; a Vast Sea in which You Can Frolic, Swimming in Bliss and Benefit; a Veritable Ocean which Spreads Far and Wide, Bringing the Teachings of the Able Buddhas to Every Land; in brief, the Instruction on How to Depict, in Painted Form, 153 Scenes of the Holy Life of that Illustrious and Holy Being, Je Tsongkapa (rJe-btzun Tzong-kha-pa chen-po’i rnam-thar ras-bris kyi tsul brgya nga-gsum-pa Tzinta-maṇi’i phreng-ba thub-bstan rgyas-byed phan-bde’i rol-mtso chen-po, ACIP S00072), ff. 1a-26b.

B40
(Gung-thang) Blo-gros rgya-mtso, 1851-1930.  The Bright Light of the Daymaker, which Opens Your Eyes to See the Path of the Profound: An Illumination of the True Meaning of the Analysis of the Middle Way [by ‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa’i rdo-rje Ngag-dbang brtzon-’grus]  entitled "A Treasure House of Scriptural Authority and Logical Proof” (dBu-ma’i mtha’-dpyod lung-rigs gter-mdzod kyi dgongs-don gsal-bar byed-pa’i nyin-byed snang-ba zab-lam lta-ba’i mig-’byed, ACIP S00975), ff. 1a-258a.

B41
(T’a-la’i sku-phreng dang-po rGyal-ba) dGe-’dun rgya-mtso, 1476-1542.  A Jewel which Illuminates, Totally, the True Intent: An Explanation of “Entering the Middle Way” (dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i rnam-bshad dGongs-pa’i don rab-tu gsal-ba’i rgyan, ACIP S05566), ff. 1a-125a.

B42
dNgul-chu Dharma bhadra, 1772-1851.  Response to a Question on Whether there are Differences in the Gravity of Infractions that are Otherwise in the Same Category within the Vows of Individual Liberation  (So-thar gyi ltung-ba sde lnga’i sde-tsan re-re la yang nang-gses kyi nyes-pa lci-yang yod dam med skor gyi dri-lan, ACIP S0637MN0), ff. 120a-120b.

B43
(‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa sku-phreng dang-po) ‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa’i rdo-rje Ngag-dbang brtzon-’grus, 1648-1721.  The End of All Error, a Lovely String of Wishing Jewels, Necklace for Those of Clear Intellect, and Fulfillment of the Hopes of Those with Goodness: A Critical Examination of Difficult Points in the Teachings on Buddhist Discipline (‘Dul-ba’i dka’-gnas rnam-par dpyad-pa ‘Khrul-spong blo-gsal mgul-rgyan tzinta ma-ṇi’i phreng-mdzes sKal-bzang re-ba kun-skong, ACIP S00839-1 & S00839-2), Vol. 1 ff. 1a-316a; Vol 2 ff. 1a-158a.

B44
Chandra, Lokesh, b. 1927.  Tibetan-Sanskrit Dictionary (in 19 volumes, beginning in 1992 and continuing to present; many volumes have been input by ACIP for internal reference use) (New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan).

B45	
(Paṇ-chen) Blo-gros legs-bzang, c. 1510.  "The Jewel of the True Thought of the ‘Great Commentary, the String of Precious Gems,’" being an Overview of a Classical Commentary, the Root Text entitled "The Summary of Vowed Morality" (bsTan-bcos ‘Dul-ba mdo rtza-ba’i spyi-don T’ik-chen rin-chen phreng-ba’i dgongs-rgyan, ACIP SL00059); Vol. 1, 1a-217a; Vol. 2, ff. 1a-128a.

B46
(‘Bras-spungs Blo-gsal-gling gi Tre’o dge-bshes) Tse-dbang bsam-’grub, fl. 1835.  The String of Shining Jewels: An Explanation of the Rules Contained in the Three Types of Vows: Those of Individual Freedom, Those of the Bodhisattva, and Those of the Secret Word (So-thar byang-sems gsang-sngags gsum gyi sdom-pa’i bslab-bya Nor-bu’i ‘od-’phreng, ACIP S00201), ff. 1a-37a.

B47
(T’a-la’i sku-phreng gnyis-pa) (rGyal-ba) dGe-’dun rgya-mtso, 1476-1542.  The Lamp that Illuminates, with Total Clarity, the True Intent: A Commentary on Difficult Points in "Distinguishing between the Figurative and the Literal," found in the Collected Works of the Holy and Omniscient One [Je Tsongkapa] (rJe-btzun Thams-cad mkhyen-pa’i gsung-’bum las Drang-nges rnam-’byed kyi dka’-’grel dgongs-pa’i don rab tu gsal-bar byed-pa’i sgron-me, ACIP SE05565), ff. 1a-106a.

B48
(Bya-bral-ba) dKon-mchog rgyal-mtsan, 14th century.  A Supplement to the Instructions on Developing the Good Heart delivered as an Oral Teaching (Blo-sbyong gsung-bgros-ma’i kha-skong, ACIP S00406), pp. 345-435.

B49	
(lCang-skya) Rol-pa’i rdo-rje, 1717-1786.  Part Four of “The Lovely Jewel for the Mountain Peak of the Teachings of the Able One, a Survey of the Schools of Philosophy” (Grub-pa’i mtha’i rnam-par bzhag-pa gsal-bar bshad-pa Thub-bstan lhun-po’i mdzes-rgyan zhes-bya-ba las sde-tsan bzhi-pa lCang-skya grub-mtha’ las sde-tsan bzhi-pa, ACIP S00063), ff. 1a-149a.

B50
(mKhas-grub) bsTan-pa dar-rgyas, 1493-1568.  A Gate of Entry for Those of Clear Minds, an Ocean of Reasoning: A Dialectical Analysis of the Explication known as “Illumination of the True Thought” (rNam-bshad dGongs-pa rab-gsal gyi mtha’-dpyod Rigs-pa’i rgya-mtso blo-gsal gyi ‘jug-sgo dbu-ma mtha’-dpyod, ACIP S00022), ff. 1a-177a.

B51
Se-ra rje-btzun Chos kyi rgyal-mtsan, 1469-1546.  "An Overview of the Sections from the Practice of Armor on Down," from the Excellent Explanation, a Sea of Sport for Those Fortunate Lords of the Serpentines, written in Clarification of Difficult Points found in the Two Treatises upon the “Ornament of Realizations” and its Commentary (bsTan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan ‘grel-pa dang bcas-pa’i rnam-bshad rnam-pa gnyis kyi dka’-ba’i gnad gsal-bar byed-pa Legs-bshad skal-bzang klu-dbang gi rol-mtso zhes-bya-ba las Go-sgrub man-chad kyi spyi-don, ACIP S06814-4), ff. 106a-180a, work #4 in a series of 11 (digital text incomplete as of this writing).
%%%asked ben & nick to re-input all 11 as of 4 18 24

B52
mKhas-grub bsTan-pa dar-rgyas, 1493-1568.  The White Lotus Garland: A Dialectic Analysis of Interdependence (rTen-’brel gyi mtha’-dpyod Padma dkar-po’i phreng-ba, ACIP S00015), ff. 1a-25a.

B53
rJe-drung Shes-rab dbang-po, 1500-1586.  The True Intent Made Even More Clear: A Treatment of Difficult Points in the Explanation of "Entering the Middle Way" entitled "Illumination of the True Thought" (dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i rnam-bshad dGongs-pa rab-gsal gyi dka’-gnad gtan la ‘bebs-pa dGongs-pa yang-gsal), ACIP S00273, ff. 1a-188a.

B54
Tse-mchog gling Yongs-’dzin Ye-shes rgyal-mtsan, 1713-1793.  An Exquisite String of Gemstones, Highest Jewel to Adorn the Teachings of the Victors: The Collected Biographies of the Lamas of the Lineage of the Steps of the Path to Enlightenment (Byang-chub lam gyi rim-pa’i bla-ma brgyud-pa’i rnam-par thar-pa rGyal-bstan mdzes-pa’i rgyan-mchog phul-byung nor-bu’i phreng-ba), ACIP S05985, in 2 volumes: ACIP S05985-1, ff. 1b–474a; and ACIP S05985-2, ff. 1b–498a.

B55
Tse-mchog gling Yongs-’dzin Ye-shes rgyal-mtsan, 1713-1793.  Meaningful to Behold: A Commentary on Confessing the Downfalls of the Bodhisattva (Byang-chub sems-dpa’i ltung-ba bshags-pa’i t’ikka mThong-ba don-ldan), S06058, ff. 1a-14a.

B56
Chos-rje Ngag-dbang dpal-ldan,  b. 1806.  “Following a Tradition of Eloquence”: A Word-by-Word Commentary to “Entering the Middle Way” (dBu-ma la ‘jug-pa’i tsig-’grel Legs-bshad rjes-’brang), ACIP S00981, ff. 1a-189a.

B57
(Co-ne bla-ma) Grags-pa bshad-sgrub, 1675–1748.  The Cloud of Offerings, Which Pleases the Wise, and Illuminates the True Thought of the Treatise Known as the “Jewel of Realizations”: A Combined Word Commentary and Dialectical Analysis of the Work (mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan gyi dgongs-pa gsal-bar byed-pa mKhas-pa dgyes-pa’i mchod-sprin, tsig don mtha’ dpyod zung ‘brel du bshad pa, ACIP S00195), in 6 volumes with the following pagination: Vol. 1 (on Chapter 1 of the root text), ff. 81a–173a (incomplete); Vol. 2 (on Ch. 2), ff. 1a–55a; Vol. 3 (on Ch. 3), ff. 1a–28a; Vol. 4 (on Ch. 4), ff. 1a–77a; Vol. 5 (on Chs. 5–7), ff. 1a–33a; and Vol. 6 (on Ch. 8), ff. 1a–36a.

B58
rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  Difficult Questions on Negative and Foundation Consciousness (Yid dang kun-gzhi’i dka’-ba’i gnas, ACIP digital text SL05414A), ff. 1a-4a.

B59
rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  The Ocean of Fine Explanation: An In-Depth Commentary upon “Difficult Questions on Negative and Foundation Consciousness” (Yid dang kun-gzhi’i dka’-ba’i gnas rgya-cher ‘grel-ba), ACIP digital text ST05414B), ff. 1a-44a.

B60
(‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa sku-phreng dang-po) ‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa’i rdo-rje Ngag-dbang brtzon-’grus, 1648–1721.  A Total Clarification of the Positions Taken by the Victors of the Three Times, a Classical Commentary Which is a Treasure Trove of Jewels from the Teachings of the Able Ones: A Commentary on the True Thought of That Highest Teaching, the “Treasure House of Higher Knowledge” (Dam-pa’i Chos mngon-pa mdzod kyi dgongs-’grel gyi bstan-bcos Thub-bstan nor-bu’i gter-mdzod dus gsum rGyal-ba’i bzhad-don kun-gsal, ACIP S19100), in 8 volumes: Vol. 1, ff. 1a–107a; Vol. 2, ff. 1a–102a; Vol. 3, ff. 1a–131b; Vol. 4, ff. 1a–127b; Vol. 5 ff. 1a–61a; Vol. 6, ff. 1a–61a; Vol. 7, ff. 1a–42a; Vol. 8, ff. 1a–45a.

B61
Paṇ-chen bla-ma sku-phreng gsum-pa dPal-ldan ye-shes, 1738-1780.  The Wellspring of a Thousand Wonders: A Description of that Great Land of Spiritual Attainment, Shambhala, along with Acconts of Lifetimes in the Land of the Realized Ones (Grub-pa’i gnas chen-po Shambha la’i rnam-bshad ‘phags-yul gyi rtogs-brjod dang bcas-pa Ngo-mtsar bye-ba’i ‘byung-gnas, ACIP S12212), ff. 1a-50a.

B62
mKhas-grub bsTan-pa dar-rgyas, 1493-1568.  The Garland of White Lotuses, the Essence of Eloquence: An Overview of the Meditations of the Form and Formless Realms (bSam-gzugs kyi spyi-don Legs-par bshad-pa’i snying-po Padma dkar-po’i ‘phreng-ba, ACIP S00016), ff. 1a-25a.

B63
Co-ne bla-ma Grags-pa bshad-sgrub, 1675-1748.  A Brief Essence of All Schools of Philosophy (Grub-mtha’ thams-cad gyi snying-po bsdus-pa, ACIP S25008), ff. 1a-31b.

B64
(‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa sku-phreng dang-po) ‘Jam-dbyangs bzhad-pa’i rdo-rje Ngag-dbang brtzon-’grus, 1648–1721.  The Jewel Lamp which Illuminates every Meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom: A Dialectical Analysis of the Classical Commentary known as the “Jewel of Realizations” (bsTan-bcos mngon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan gyi mtha’-dpyod Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa’i don kun gsal-ba’i rin-chen sgron-me, ACIP S19088), ff. 1a–290a.

B65
Se-ra rje-btzun Chos kyi rgyal-mtsan, 1469-1546.  A Necklace for the Wise: A Teaching by the Good and Glorious Jetsun Chukyi Gyeltsen which Presents an Outline of the Levels & Paths (rJe-btzun Chos kyi rgyal-mtsan dpal bzang-po’i gsung mKhas-pa’i mgul-rgyan ces-bya-ba sa-lam rnam-gzhag, ACIP S06826), ff. 1a-20a.

B66
mKhas-grub sbyin-pa dar-rgyas, b. 1558.  The Jewel Necklace for Intelligent Minds: An Overview of the Subject of the Turning of the Wheel of the Dharma Written by the Wise & Accomplished Jinpa Dargye (mKhas-grub sByin-pa dar-rgyas kyis mdzad-pa’i chos-’khor gyi spyi-don Blo-gsal gzhon-nu’i mgrin-rgyan, ACIP S00208), ff. 1a-60a.

B67
mKhas-grub rje (dGe-legs dpal bzang-po), 1385–1438.  Illumination of Points That Are Difficult to Realize: An Explanation of “The Meaning Clarified,” a Commentary to the “Jewel of Realizations,” a Classical Comentary of Advices upon the Perfection of Wisdom (Shes-rab kyi phra-rol tu phyin-pa’i man-ngag gi bstan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan gyi ‘grel-pa Don-gsal-ba’i rnam-bshad rTogs-dka’i snang-ba zhes-bya-ba, ACIP S05461), ff. 1a–223a.

B68
dGe-bshes Ye-shes dbang-phyug, 1928–1997.  The Jewel of the True Thought: An Overview & Dialectical Analysis of the Second Chapter of the “Commentary on Accurate Perception” (Tsad-ma rnam-’grel dGongs-pa’i rgyan, le’u gnyis-pa’i spyi-mtha’, ACIP SE00023-2), 218pp.

B69
rGyal-tsab rje (Dar-ma rin-chen), 1364–1432.  A Commentary to the “Sixty Verses on Reasoning” (Rigs-pa drug-cu-pa’i ṭ’ikka, ACIP S05443), ff. 1a–33a.

B70
rJe Tzong-kha-pa (Blo-bzang grags-pa), 1357–1419.  Fine Explanation, a String of Golden Beads: An Extensive Explanation of “The Jewel of Realizations, a Classical Commentary of Instruction for the Perfection of Wisdom,” along with Its Own Commentary (Shes-rab kyi pha-rol tu phyin-pa’i man-ngag gi bstan-bcos mNgon-par rtogs-pa’i rgyan ‘grel-pa dang bcas-pa’i rgya-cher bshad-pa’i Legs-bshad gser-phreng, ACIP S05412), in two volumes: Vol. 1 (ff. 1a–405a) and Vol. 2 (ff. 1a–421a).

B71
Co-ne bla-ma Grags-pa bshad-sgrub (1675-1748).  A Ship for Entering the “Sea of Reasoning, an Explanation of ‘Wisdom,’ the Root Text on the Middle Way” (dBu-ma rtza-ba shes-rab kyi rnam-bshad Rigs-pa’i rgya-mtsor ‘jug-pa’i gru-gzings, ACIP S00028), ff. 1a-108a.

B72
mKhas-grub rje (dGe-legs dpal bzang-po), 1385–1438.  Opening the Eyes of the Fortunate: A Classical Commentary which Illuminates the Real Nature of Profound Emptiness (Zab-mo stong-pa-nyid kyi de-kho-na-nyid rab tu gsal-bar byed-pa’i bstan-bcos sKal-bzang mig-’byed, ACIP S05459), ff. 1a–179a.  Commonly known by the name of The Great Interlude on Emptiness (sTong-thun chen-mo).

B73
rJe Tzong-kha-pa (Blo-bzang grags-pa), 1357–1419.  The Essence of Eloquence, on the Art of Interpretation (Drang-nges legs-bshad snying-po, ACIP S05396), ff. 1a–114a.

B74
(Bse, also seen as Bsve) Ngag-dbang bkra-shis, 1678-1738.  Fulfilling the Hopes of the Fortunate: A Necklace for the Wise, a Great Explanation which is Designed for All Three Types of People—those of Highest, Medium, and Lesser Capacity; and which Wraps into it the Meaning of the “Commentary on Correct Perception,” that Great Classical Work which itself Comments on the True Intent of the Teachings on Correct Perception (Tsad-ma’i dgongs-’grel gyi bstan-bcos chen-po rNam-’grel gyi don gcig tu dril-ba Blo rab ‘bring tha-ma gsum du ston-pa legs-bshad chen-po mkhas-pa’i mgul-brgyan skal-bzang re-ba kun-skong, ACIP S00217), ff. 1a-158b.

B75
dNgul-chu Dharma bhadra, 1772-1851.  Response to a Question on the Five Degenerations of the Eon of Strife (rTzod-dus snyigs-ma lnga’i don gyi dri-lan, ACIP S6370/253(P3)), ff. 130b-131a.

B76
Phyva-pa Chos kyi seng-ge, 1109-1169.  An Abbreviated Commentary upon “A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life,” Composed by the Buddhist Monk Chapa Chukyi Senge (dGe-slong Phyva-pa Chos kyi seng-ges mdzad pa’i sPyod-‘jug bsdus-don).  Scans of this text are reported in the TBRC database, it seems in 7 folios, and there is a highly corrupt e-text version there.  We have not located a better resource.

B77
Se-ra rje-btzun Chos kyi rgyal-mtsan, 1469–1546.  Sera Jetsun's Overview of Je Tsongkapa's "Art of Interpretation" (rJe-btzun-pa'i Drang-nges rnam-'byed kyi spyi-don, ACIP S06820), ff. 1a–54a.

B78
(Se-ra) rJe-btzun Chos kyi rgyal-mtsan, 1469–1546.  The String of Golden Beads of Fine Explanation, a Necklace for the Wise: An Analysis of the First Chapter of the "Jewel of Realizations," and Composed in the Form of Notes to a Teaching by the Good and Glorious Jetsun Chukyi Gyeltsen (sKabs dang-po'i mtha'-dpyod Legs-bshad gser gyi phreng-ba mkhas-pa'i mgul-rgyan zhes-bya-ba rJe-btzun Chos kyi rgyal-mtsan dpal bzang-po'i gsung zin-bris su bkod-pa, ACIP S06815-1), 178ff.








Bibliography of Works
Originally Written in English

E1
Whitney, William Dwight (1827-1894).  Sanskrit Grammar, including Both the Classical Language, and the Older Dialects of Veda and Brahmana, fifth edition (Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel, 1924), 551pp.

E2
Whitney, William Dwight (1827-1894).  The Roots, Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit Language (New Haven: American Oriental Society, 1945), 250pp.

E3
Roach, Geshe Michael (b. 1952).  King of the Dharma: the Illustrated Life of Je Tsongkapa, Teacher of the First Dalai Lama, with the Complete Paintings and the Original Text of the All-Knowing One, Jamyang Shepay Dorje (1648-1721) (Wayne, New Jersey: Diamond Cutter Press, 2008), 462pp.  The original biography by Jamyang Shepay Dorje is found at %%B39.

E4
Das, Sarat Chandra (1849-1917).  A Tibetan-English Dictionary, with Sanskrit Synonyms (first edition Calcutta: 1902; input edition Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, Delhi, 1995), 1353pp.

E5
Nāgārjuna (c. 200ad).  Nagarjuna’s Letter to a Friend, with a Commentary by Venerable Rendawa, Zḧo-nu Lo-dr̈o [sic], translated by Geshe Lobsang Tharchin and Artemus B. Engle (Dharamsala, India: Library of Tibetan Works & Archives, 1979), 146pp.  Root text is a translation of %%S25 above.

E6
Mitra, Dr. Rajendralala (1822-1891).  Remarks on the Term “Ekotibhava,” a letter from Max Muller placed before the Asiatic Socity of Bengal in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, January 1887, pp. 2-4.

E7
Mukerjea, Nilmani (fl. 1880).  On “Ekotibhava,” pp. 179-180 of The Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. 56, July, 1887.

E8
Reeve, Rev. William (1794-1850), and Daniel Sanderson (fl. 1850).  A Dictionary, Canarese and English (Bangalore: The Wesleyan Mission Press, 1858).

E9
Kramer, Ben (b. 1976) with Geshe Michael Roach (b. 1952), translators.  Great Ideas of the East: A Survey of 101 Enlightening Belief Systems from Ancient Asia (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2023), 548pp.
   Translation of: (Co-ne bla-ma) Grags-pa bshad-sgrub, 1675-1748.  A Brief Essence of All Schools of Philosophy (Grub-mtha’ thams-cad gyi snying-po bsdus-pa, ACIP S25008), ff. 1a–31b.

E10
Lashaw, Nicholas (b. 1979) with Geshe Michael Roach (b. 1952), translators.  Nothing Is the Way It Seems: The Sixty Verses of Nagarjuna (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2023), 677pp.
   Translation of: rGyal-tsab rje (Dar-ma rin-chen), 1364–1432.  A Commentary to the “60 Verses on Reasoning” (Rigs-pa drug-cu-pa’i ṭ’ikka, ACIP S05443), ff. 1a–33a.

E11
Shi, Sugeng (b. 1969) with Geshe Michael Roach (b. 1952), translators.  Stopping the Circle of Sadness: The Buddhist Teaching of the Wheel of Life (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2023), 527pp.
   Translation of: (mKhas-grub) bsTan-pa dar-rgyas, 1493–1568.  An Analysis of How All Things Depend on Each Other: A Teaching by the Wise and Accomplished One, That Head Bull among All Teachers, the Great Gendun Tendarwa (mKhas-grub smra-ba’i khyu-mchog dGe-’dun bstan-dar-ba chen-po’i gsung rTen-’brel gyi mtha’-dpyod, ACIP S00015), ff. 1a–25a.

E12
van der Pas, Elizabeth (b. 1951) with Geshe Michael Roach (b. 1952), translators.  Sunlight on the Path to Freedom: A Commentary to the Diamond Cutter Sutra (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2020), 508pp.
   Translation of: (Co-ne bla-ma) Grags-pa bshad-sgrub (1675-1748).  The Sun that Illuminates the Profound Meaning of the Excellent Path for Travelling to Freedom: A Commentary on “The Diamond Cutter Sutra” (rDor-gcod kyi ‘grel-pa Thar-par bgrod-pa’i lam-bzang zab-don, ACIP ST00024), ff. 1a-44a.

E13
Smith, Word (b. 1979) with Geshe Michael Roach (b. 1952).  The Golden Key: Difficult Questions in the Mind Only School of Buddhism, Part One (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2021), 301pp.
   Translation of: Rigs-grva Rig-pa’i ral-gri (aka Blo-bzang ‘jigs-med), b. 1763.  The Golden Key: An Annotated Commentary to the Root Text of “Negative and Foundation Consciousness” (Yid dang kun-gzhi’i rtza-ba’i mchan-’grel gSer gyi lde-mig, ACIP S25001), ff. 1a–15a; input from A Collection of Texts Drawn from the Group of Works of our Tradition, composed by Lords of Sages from the Shining Gomang College, which are Extremely Rare in Modern Times (Mundgod, India: sGo-mang dGe-bshes bsKal-bzang thabs-mkhas, 1974), in two volumes of individually paginated works: Vol. 1, total 310ff; Vol. 2, total 300ff.

E14
Smith, Word (b. 1979) with Geshe Michael Roach (b. 1952).  The Golden Key: Difficult Questions in the Mind Only School of Buddhism, Part Two (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, in process 2024).
   Translation of two works:
   rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  Difficult Questions on Negative and Foundation Consciousness (Yid dang kun-gzhi’i dka’-ba’i gnas, ACIP digital text SL05414A), ff. 1a-4a.
   rJe Tzong-kha-pa Blo-bzang grags-pa, 1357-1419.  The Ocean of Fine Explanation: An In-Depth Commentary upon “Difficult Questions on Negative and Foundation Consciousness” (Yid dang kun-gzhi’i dka’-ba’i gnas rgya-cher ‘grel-ba), ACIP digital text ST05414B), ff. 1a-44a.

E15
Greer, Bets (b. 1959) with Geshe Michael Roach (b. 1952).  Emptiness Meditations: Learning to See that Nothing Is Itself (Sedona: Diamond Cutter Press, 2021), 445pp.
   Translation of: Co-ne bla-ma Grags-pa bshad-grub (1675-1748).  Light on the Path to Freedom: An Explanation of the Steps for Developing an Understanding That Nothing Is Itself—A View Which Is the Very Essence of All the Buddha’s Teachings (bsTan-pa’i snying-po bdag-med rtogs-pa’i lta-ba’i rim-pa rnam-par bshad-pa Thar-lam gsal-byed), ACIP digital text S25125), ff. 1a-23a.  The translated volume also includes other works such as Master Kamalashila’s Steps to Meditation.



The Diamond Cutter Classics Series

The book you are reading is one of over 100 volumes in the Diamond Cutter Classics Series.  For those who are interested in furthering their study of the great ideas of ancient Asia, we provide the following list of titles in the series.  They cover both original translations of the ancient classics; courses for modern life based upon them; and popular titles conveying the same information to a more general audience.
The titles marked with an asterisk (*) are completed and published, as of May 2026; printed and ebook versions are available from online booksellers worldwide, such as Amazon, as well as from the Diamond Cutter Press at DiamondCutterPress.com.  Publications from specific organizations listed, such as the Diamond Cutter Institute Global (DCIG), are available through those organizations.
For more information, to follow the translation of these great books live, or to make any inquiry about our work, please visit the Diamond Cutter Classics Series website at DiamondCutterClassics.com.  We would love to hear from you.

List of Titles
Group 1
Worldview Books for the Modern World

*Volume 1
The Diamond Cutter:
The Buddha on Managing Your Business and Your Life

*Volume 2
The Garden: A Parable

*Volume 3
How Yoga Works

*Volume 4
The Karma of Love:
100 Answers for Your Relationship

*Volume 5
Karmic Management:
What Goes Around Comes Around, 
in Your Business and Your Life

*Volume 6
The Tibetan Book of Yoga:
Ancient Buddhist Teachings
on the Philosophy & Practice of Yoga

*Volume 7
To the Inner Kingdom
	Teaching from a Three-Year Silent Retreat
	by Geshe Michael Roach

*Volume 8
The Magic of Empty Teachers
Teaching from a Three-Year Silent Retreat
	by Geshe Michael Roach

*Volume 9
Second Sight
Teaching from a Three-Year Silent Retreat
	by Geshe Michael Roach

*Volume 10
Ripples of Light
Teaching from a Three-Year Silent Retreat
	by Geshe Michael Roach

*Volume 11
The Essential Yoga Sutra

*Volume 12
King of the Dharma: The Illustrated Life of Je Tsongkapa

*Volume 13
China Love You: The Death of Global Competition

*Volume 14
The 10 Biggest Mistakes
You Can Make in Your Life (And How Not To)

*Volume 15
The Eastern Path to Heaven:
A Guide to Happiness from the Teachings of Jesus in Tibet

Volume 16
A Better History of Time:
Ancient Answers to the Unsolved Riddles of Modern Science

Volume 17
If This Happens, That Happens: A Study of the Wheel of Life

*Volume 18
Katrin: Girls Do Do That

Volume 19
Teachings from 3-Year Retreat

*Volume 130
A Springtime Song of the Colorless Light

*Volume 131
Outline for Saving a Civilization

Volume 134
My Desert Family:
	Notes from 1,000 Circle Days

Volume 137
Teachings from 3-Year Retreat
	by Geshe Michael Roach


Group 2
Foundation Books
of the Diamond Cutter Institute (DCI)

*Volume 20
DCI Foundation Book 1
Success Inside, Success Outside

*Volume 21
DCI Foundation Book 2
Talent, Passion, Purpose:
Finding out What You’re Supposed to Do in this World

*Volume 22
DCI Foundation Book 3
Mastering Your Mind 
for Success at Work and at Home

*Volume 23
DCI Foundation Book 4
Finding, Keeping, and Loving Them:
The Karmic Secret to Great Relationships

*Volume 24
DCI Foundation Book 5
12 Deeper Tools for Perfect Relationships
at Home & at Work

*Volume 25
DCI Foundation Book 6
Peeling Off Our Addictions with the Wheel of Life

*Volume 26
DCI Foundation Book 7
Reaching the Diamond World:
Learning to Touch the Source of All Success

*Volume 27
DCI Foundation Book 8
Automatic Leadership

*Volume 28
DCI Foundation Book 9
True Innovators:
The Deeper Causes of Creativity

*Volume 29
DCI Foundation Book 10
Impossible Anger:
Never Get Upset Again

*Volume 30
DCI Foundation Book 11
Time Management: 
Using the Inner Conversation

*Volume 31
DCI Foundation Book 12
The Art of Gratitude


Group 3
Advanced Books
of the Diamond Cutter Institute (DCI)

*Volume 32
DCI Advanced Book 1
Problem-Solving Masterpieces

*Volume 33
DCI Advanced Book 2
Techniques for Moving Dreams into Reality

*Volume 34
DCI Advanced Book 3
Time to Upgrade:
Belief System Checklist for Success

*Volume 35
DCI Advanced Book 4
Double Your Productivity
with Daily Wisdom AI

*Volume 138
DCI Advanced Book 5
Enjoyable:
Fun (Deep) Tips for Enjoying Your Life More


Group 4
Foundation Books of the Asian Classics Institute (ACI)
(all translated compilations from ancient classics)

*Volume 36
ACI Foundation Book 1
The Principal Teachings of Buddhism

*Volume 37
ACI Foundation Book 2
Buddhist Refuge

*Volume 38
ACI Foundation Book 3
Applied Meditation

*Volume 39
ACI Foundation Book 4
The Proof of Future Lives

*Volume 40
ACI Foundation Book 5
How Karma Works

*Volume 41
ACI Foundation Book 6
The Diamond-Cutter Sutra

*Volume 42
ACI Foundation Book 7
The Vows of the Bodhisattva

*Volume 43
ACI Foundation Book 8
Death and the Realms of Existence

*Volume 44
ACI Foundation Book 9
The Ethical Life

*Volume 45
ACI Foundation Book 10
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, Part I

*Volume 46
ACI Foundation Book 11
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, Part II

*Volume 47
ACI Foundation Book 12
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, Part III

*Volume 48
ACI Foundation Book 13
The Art of Reasoning

*Volume 49
ACI Foundation Book 14
Lojong, Developing the Good Heart

*Volume 50
ACI Foundation Book 15
What the Buddha Really Meant

*Volume 51
ACI Foundation Book 16
The Great Ideas of Buddhism, Part One
A Review of ACI Courses 1-5

*Volume 52
ACI Foundation Book 17
The Great Ideas of Buddhism, Part Two
A Review of ACI Courses 6-10

*Volume 53
ACI Foundation Book 18
The Great Ideas of Buddhism, Part Three
A Review of ACI Courses 11-15

*Volume 132
The Ten Practice Modules of ACI


Group 5
Advanced Books of the Asian Classics Institute
(all translated compilations from ancient classics)

*Volume 54
ACI Advanced Book 1
The Path to Bliss, Part One

*Volume 55
ACI Advanced Book 2
The Path to Bliss, Part Two

*Volume 56
ACI Advanced Book 3
The Path to Bliss, Part Three

*Volume 57
ACI Advanced Book 4
A Rite of Empowerment into the Secret Teachings
of the Lord of Terror (Yamantaka)

*Volume 58
ACI Advanced Book 5
The Commitments of the Secret Word

*Volume 59
ACI Advanced Book 6
An Overview of the Diamond Way

*Volume 60
ACI Advanced Book 7
The Blessing of the Diamond Angel (Vajra Yogini)

*Volume 61
ACI Advanced Book 8
Sadhana: Reaching the Angel

*Volume 62
ACI Advanced Book 9
The Yoga of the Lama, Part 1

*Volume 63
ACI Advanced Book 10
The Yoga of the Lama, Part 2

*Volume 64
ACI Advanced Book 11
The Yoga of the Mantra

*Volume 65
ACI Advanced Book 12
Lerung: The Art of Diamond Retreat

*Volume 66
ACI Advanced Book 13
A Bridge to the Stage of Completion

*Volume 67
ACI Advanced Book 14
The Six Yogas of Naropa, Part 1

*Volume 68
ACI Advanced Book 15
The Six Yogas of Naropa, Part 2

*Volume 69
ACI Advanced Book 16
Continuing with the Stage of Completion

*Volume 70
ACI Advanced Book 17
Practice with a Spiritual Partner

*Volume 71
ACI Advanced Book 18
The Offering to Lamas

*Volume 73
ACI Advanced Book 19
The Complete Practices of the Medicine Buddha


Group 6
Translations of Ancient Asian Classics

*Volume 72
Sunlight on the Path to Freedom:
A Commentary to the Diamond Cutter Sutra
by Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

*Volume 74
The Principal Teachings of Buddhism
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
including a commentary by Pabongka Rinpoche (1878-1941)

*Volume 75
Door to the Diamond Way
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
including a commentary by Pabongka Rinpoche (1878-1941)

*Volume 76
Poems from the Tantric College
by Lobsang Chukyi Gyeltsen,
His Holiness the First Panchen Lama (1565-1662)

*Volume 77
A Door to Emptiness: The Crucial Teaching for 
Touching the Diamond World
by Ngawang Tashi, of the Clan of Sey (1678-1738)

*Volume 78
The Golden Key: Difficult Questions
in the Mind Only School of Buddhism, Part One
original text by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
commentary by Fearless Blade, 
Jikme Rikpay Reldri (fl. 1775)

*Volume 79
Three Treasures: A Buddhist Prayer Book
by Dakpo Lama Jampel Hlundrup Gyatso (1845-1919),
Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419), Gyuchen Sangye Gyatso (b. 1550),
& His Holiness the First Panchen Lama (1565-1662)

Volume 80
Sky Flowers & Magic Shows: The Interaction of Reality
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 1 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

Volume 81
Neither One nor Many: The Nature & Function of Ultimate Reality
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 2 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

Volume 82
The Essence of the Ocean: A Classical Summary of Buddhist Ethics
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
including a commentary by
Gyal Kenpo Drakpa Gyeltsen (1762-1837)

Volume 83
The Sun which Illuminates the True Thought
of All the Able Ones and their Children:
A Commentary to the “Treasure House of Higher Knowledge”
by Master Vasubandhu (350ad), 
with a commentary by
Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

Volume 84
All Paths Are One: The Role of Understanding in Achieving Goals
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 3 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

*Volume 85
Stopping the Circle of Sadness:
The Buddhist Teaching of the Wheel of Life
by Kedrup Tenpa Dargye (1493-1568)

*Volume 86
Emptiness Meditations:
Learning How to See That Nothing Is Itself
by Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748),
with additional instruction from:
Arya Nagarjuna (200ad)
Master Kamalashila (775ad)
Pabongka Rinpoche (1878-1941)
Trijang Rinpoche (1901-1981)

*Volume 87
Nothing Is the Way It Seems:
The Sixty Verses of Nagarjuna
by Master Nagarjuna (200ad), 
with a commentary by
Gyaltsab Je, Darma Rinchen (1364-1432)

*Volume 88
Great Ideas of the East: A Survey of 101 Enlightening
Belief Systems from Ancient Asia
by Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

*Volume 89
Sunlight on Suchness: The Meaning of the Heart Sutra
by Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

Volume 90
An Expanded Commentary to “Difficult Points on the Subject of 
the Negative Mind and Foundation Consciousness”
original text & autocommentary 
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419)

*Volume 91
Deathless Nectar for Helping Others:
A Commentary to the “Crown of Knives”
by Dharma Rakshita (c. 1000ad) &
Tenpa Rabgye, Throneholder of Radreng (1759-1816)

Volume 92
The Puddle & The Sea: The Art of Interpretation
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 4 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

*Volume 93
All the Kinds of Karma
by Lord Buddha (500bc)

Volume 94
The Six Flavors of Emptiness: New Ways of Looking at Our World
Compilation of ancient authors

Volume 95
A Car Is Not a Car: A Commentary to the Chinese Edition
of the “Questions of King Milinda”
translation of the ancient Chinese of a philosophical conversation 
between the Greek king Menander (140bc)
and the Buddhist monk Nagasena,
with a commentary compiled from traditional sources
dating from the 14th to 17th centuries

Volume 96
The Source and Stopping of Pain:
An Ancient Teaching on the Wheel of Life
by Master Vasubandhu (350ad)

Volume 97
Did the Buddha Contradict Himself?
A Study of Literal & Figurative Meaning
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 5 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

Volume 98
Using Contemplation to Understand How the World Really Works
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 6 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

*Volume 99
Door to the Diamond Way: The Mountain of Blessings
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
with a commentary by
Pabongka Rinpoche (1878-1941)

Volume 100
The Three Turnings of the Wheel: The Interpretation of Historical Periods
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 7 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

Volume 101
The Hidden Workings of the World
by Master Yuance of the Tang Dynasty (613-696ad)
Book 8 of the Xuanzang’s Legacy Series

Volume 102
Destroying the Darkness in Our Minds:
An Explanation of the Seven Books of Reasoning
by Kedrup Je Gelek Pel Sangpo (1385-1438)

Volume 103
Opening the Eyes of the Fortunate: An Interlude on Emptiness
by Kedrup Je Gelek Pel Sangpo (1385-1438)

Volume 104
A Gift of Liberation, Thrust into Our Hands
by Pabongka Rinpoche (1878-1941)

Volume 105
An Overview of the Middle Way
by Kedrup Tenpa Dargye (1493-1568)

Volume 106
A Dialectic Analysis of the Perfection of Wisdom
by Kedrup Tenpa Dargye (1493-1568)

Volume 107
The Illumination of the True Thought
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419)

Volume 108
A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life
by Master Shantideva (700ad)

Volume 109
The Great Commentary to the Diamond Cutter Sutra
by Master Kamalashila (750ad)

Volume 110
A Ship on the Sea of Emptiness: The Wisdom of Nagarjuna
by Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

*Volume 111
The Devil Debates an Angel:
	A struggle against our tendency to think
	that things are coming at us
by Lobsang Chukyi Gyeltsen,
His Holiness the First Panchen Lama (1565-1662)

*Volume 112
The Sweet Essence of the Nectar of the Angels of the Three Worlds
by Pabongka Rinpoche (1878-1941)

*Volume 113
The Drumsong of the Gods, which Calls Us to
the Paradise of the Diamond Angel
by Yangchen Druppay Dorje (1809-1887)

Volume 114
Compassion Highway:
An Explanation of the Vows of the Bodhisattva
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419)

Volume 115
Changkya’s Schools of Philosophy
by Changkya Rolpay Dorje (1717-1786)

Volume 116
A Gemstone of the True Intent:
A Commentary on “The String of Precious Jewels”
by Gyalwa Gendun Drup,
His Holiness the First Dalai Lama (1391-1474),
with a commentary by
Panchen Lodru Leksang, 9th throneholder of Tashi Hlunpo (c. 1510)

Volume 117
The Essence of Eloquence,
on The Art of Interpretation
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
including the text of the sutra What I Really Meant,
by the Buddha (500bc)

Volume 118
An Elucidation of the Fifty Verses on Lamas
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419)

*Volume 119
The Two Sutras of the Medicine Buddha
by the Buddha (500bc)

Volume 120
Jewel of the True Thought:
A Word-by-Word Explanation
of the “Commentary on Accurate Perception”
by Master Dharmakirti (c. 635ad),
with a commentary by Geshe Yeshe Wangchuk (1928-1997)

Volume 121
The Vimalakirti Sutra
by the Buddha (500bc)

*Volume 122
The Prayers of the Seven Buddhas:
The Longer Sutra of the Medicine Buddha*
by the Buddha (500bc)

*Volume 123
A Song of My Spiritual Life
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
with a commentary by
Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

Volume 124
Nagarjuna’s String of Precious Jewels
by Arya Nagarjuna (c. 200ad),
with a commentary by
Gyaltsab Je, Darma Rinchen (1364-1432)

Volume 125
An Explanation of the Sutra on the First Principle,
and Divisions, of How Events Occur in Dependence
by the Buddha (500bc),
with a commentary by
Master Vasubandhu (c. 350ad)

*Volume 126
The Art of Sharing: How King Shri Sena
Shared Everything He Had with Others
by the Buddha (500bc) 

*Volume 127
The Other Side of Emptiness:
A Commentary on Je Tsongkapa’s
“Praise of Dependent Events”
by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
with a commentary by
Lama Quicksilver,
Ngulchu Dharma Bhadra (1772-1851)

Volume 128
Eloquent Words on the Essence of the Sea of Higher Knowledge: 
A Commentary to the “Compendium of Higher Knowledge”
by Arya Asanga (c. 350ad),
with a commentary by
Gyaltsab Je, Darma Rinchen (1364-1432)

Volume 129
The Ocean of Reasoning: An Explication
	of “Wisdom,” the Verses of the Root Text
	of the Middle Way
by Arya Nagarjuna  (c. 200ad),
with a commentary by
Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419)

Volume 133
The Wisdom of Death
	by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419)

Volume 135
Three Lam Rims
	by Je Tsongkapa (1357-1419),
	with commentaries by
	Pabongka Rinpoche, Dechen Nyingpo (1878-1941)
	and Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

Volume 136
Everything in the Universe:
Wisdom from the Buddhist Classic,
“Treasure House of Higher Knowledge”
root text by
Master Vasubandhu (350ad),
commentary by
Choney Lama, Drakpa Shedrup (1675-1748)

*Volume 139
Light for a Friend: 
An Explanation of Nagarjuna’s 
First Letter to the King
	root text by
	Arya Nagarjuna (c. 200ad),
	commentary by
	Jetsun Rendawa, Shunnu Lodru (1349-1412)

Volume 140
The Teardrop at the Heart:
A Secret Path for Traveling to
the Heaven of the Sky
by Lama Quicksilver,
Ngulchu Dharma Bhadra (1772-1851)

Volume 141
The Empowerment of Moon Lake Guanyin
	by Gyalwa Kelsang Gyatso (1708-1757) & others







	


items still to do

1) check for Tib paragraphs beginning with [,] from a O,, in paragraph before

3) have someone check number of the sections

4) fix apostrophes at end


7) the idea of repeating the intro (and root text??) in each of 4 vols

8) redline check; may need to cut up to do

9) source of Skt

10) bolding of root text

drawings for all the photos